# one number and games

# Prologue

Just over a quarter of a century ago, for seven consecutive days I sat
down and typed from 8:30 am until midnight, with just an hour for lunch,
and ever since have described this book as "having been written in a
week."

Not entirely honest, because there were loose ends still to be tied up,
and Chapter 16 was written just before the book appeared, while Chapter
13 was largely copied from a paper, "Hackenbush, Welter and Prune", that
had been written a year earlier. But also not entirely dishonest.

Why the rush? Because ONAG, as the book is familiarly known, was getting
in the way of writing *Winning Ways* (WW). Now that both books are
happily being republished by A K Peters, Onagers (a word that also means
"Wild Asses" !) can be told just how it came about before they surrender
themselves to pure pleasure (as "Onag" means in Hebrew!).

A few years previously, Elwyn Berlekamp, Richard Guy and I had agreed to
write a book on mathematical games, by which at that time we meant the
Nimlike theory developed independently by Roland Sprague and Peter
Michael Grundy for sums of impartial games-those for which the two
players have exactly the same legal moves.

I had long intended to see what would become of the theory when this
restriction was dropped, but only got around to doing so when the then
British Go Champion became a member of the Cambridge University Pure
Mathematics Department. Astonishingly, it was the resulting attempt to
understand "Go" that led to the discovery of the Surreal Numbers! This
happened because the typical "Go" endgame was visibly a sum of games in
the sense of this book, making it clear that this notion was worthy of
deep study in its own right. The Surreal Numbers then emerged as the
simplest domain to which it applies!

However, their theory rapidly burgeoned in ways that made it
inappropriate for the book that later became Winning Ways. A busy term
was approaching, and it seemed that this "transfinite" material just had
to be got out of the way before that term started if Winning Ways was
ever to be published. So I sat down for that week and wrote this book,
and then confessed the fact to my co-authors.

The most surprising immediate result was a threat of legal action from
Elwyn Berlekamp! But somehow we must have patched this up, because both
ONAG and WW appeared in the next few years, and we remain good friends.

In fact, the Surreal Numbers "surfaced" before ONAG appeared, partly
through my 1970 lectures at Cambridge and Cal. Tech., but mostly through
the wide circulation of Donald Knuth's little book, Surreal Numbers. I
am very grateful to Knuth for inventing this name-the original version
of ONAG said "Because of the generality of this Class, we shall simply
describe its members as numbers, without adding any restricting
adjective." "Surreal Numbers" is much better!

Iam very happy and grateful that A.K. Peters have agreed to publish
millennial editions of both this book and Winning Ways.

Ariel Jaffee and Kathryn Maier were responsible for handling the changes
to this edition. This is also the place to acknowledge Richard Guy's
considerable contributions to the original edition. In particular, he
designed and drew a number of the original figures and computed, or
recomputed several of the tables.

Thave called this a Prologue rather than a Preface because it is usually
understood that the Preface to a later edition of a book should contain
a description of the changes in the book and its subject since its first
edition. Some of these functions are addressed in the Epilogue.

John H. Conway

# Preface

This book was written to bring to light a relation between two of its
author's favourite subjects-the theories of transfinite numbers and
mathematical games. A few connections between these have been known for
some time, but it appears to be a new observation that we obtain a
theory at once simpler and more extensive than Dedekind's theory of the
real numbers just by defining numbers as the strengths of positions in
certain games. When we do this the usual properties of order and the
arithmetic operations follow almost immediately from definitions that
are naturally suggested, so that it was quite an amusing exercise to
write the zeroth part of the book as if these definitions had arisen
instead from an attempt to generalise Dedekind's construction!

However, we suspect that there will be many readers who are more
interested in playing games than philosophising about numbers. For these
readers we offer the following words of advice. Start reading Chapter 7,
on playing several games at once, and find an interested friend with
whom to play a few games of the domino game described there. In this
it's easy to see why ?? and ?? give Left one and two moves advantage
respectively --- when you feel you vaguely understand why ?? gives him
just half of a move's advantage, you might like to read Chapter 0, which
explains how the simplest numbers arise. You should then find no
difficulty in reading the rest of the book without knowing any more
about numbers than that "'â€†'ordinals''' are a certain kind of (usually
infinite) whole number, and that the Author has strange idiosyncracies
which make him use capital letters for certain very large infinite
collections.

Many friends have helped me to write this book, often without being
aware of the fact. I owe an especial debt to Elwyn Berlekamp and Richard
Guy, with whom I am currently preparing a more extended book on
mathematical games which should overlap this one in several places. The
book would never have appeared without the repeated gentle proddings
that came from Anthony Watkinson of Academic Press; it would have
contained many errors were it not for the careful reading of Paul Cohn
as editor, and the quality of the printing and layout could never have
been so high without the detailed attentions of Ron Hitchings and the
staff of the printers at Page Bros of Norwich. Others whose comments
have affected more than one page are Mike Christie, Aviezri Fraenkel,
Mike Guy, Peter Johnstone, Donald Knuth and Simon Norton. The varied
nature of the advice they gave is neatly encapsulated in the following
lines from Bunyan's Apology for his Book (Pilgrim's Progress) :

Some said 'John, print it'; others said, 'Not so.'

Some said 'It might do good'; others said, 'No.'

October 1975 J.H.C.
