# REFERENCES

Not all of these are mentioned in the text, the others being on related
subjects and particular games. The reader should be warned that the name
heory of Games ? usually refers to a theory of a different kind used in
economics and political decisionmaking. The series Contributions to the
Theory of Games, edited by Tucker and others, in the Princeton Annals of
Mathematics Studies, nos 24, 28, 39, 40 contains many papers on this
subject, and the fourth volume has a large bibliography.

1.  C. L. Bouton, Nim, a game with a complete mathematical theory, Ann.
    Math., Princeton (2), 3(1902), 35-39.

2.  J. H. Conway, All games bright and beautiful, The University of
    Calgary Math. Research Paper #295. October 1975.

3.  J. H. Conway, All numbers, great and small, The Univ. of Calgary
    Math. Research Paper #149, February, 1972.

4.  Aviezri S, Fraenkel, Combinatorial games with an annihilation rule,
    Proc. A.M.S. Symp. App. Math., 20(1974), 87-91.

5.  David Gale, A curious nim-type game, Amer. Math. Monthly, 81(1974),
    876-879.

6.  Solomon W. Golomb, A mathematical investigation of games of ake-away
    ? J. Combinatorial Theory, 1(1966), 443-458.

7.  P. M. Grundy, Mathematics and games, Eureka, 2(1939), 6-8.

8.  P. M. Grundy and C.A. B. Smith, Disjunctive games with the last
    player losing, Proc. Camb. Philos, Soc., 52(1956), 527-533.

9.  R. K. Guy and C. A. B, Smith. The G-values for various games, Proc.
    Cambridge Philos. Soc., 52(1956), 514-526.

10. Olof Hanner, Mean play of sums of positional games, Pacific J.
    Math., 9(1959), 81-99; M.R. 21 #3277.

11. P. G. Hinman, Finite termination games with tie, Israel J. Math.,
    12(1972), 17-22.

12. John C. Holladay, Cartesian products of termination games.
    Contributions to the theory of games, vol. 3, 189-200.#39 Ann. Math.
    Stud. Princeton. M.R. 20 \# 2236,

13. 

14. John C. Holladay, Matrix Nim, Amer. Math. Monthly, 65(1958),
    107-109; M.R. 20 \# 4812.

15. Ja. G. Kljusin, Equivalence theorems for general positional games
    (Russian) in Advances in Game Theory (Proc. 2nd All-Union Conf. on
    Game Theory, Vilnius, 1971), 209-211 Zdat intis ?Vilnius 1973.

16. Donald E. Knuth, Surreal numbers, Addison-Wesley, 1974. APPENDIX 233

17. John Milnor, Sums of positional games, Annals of Math. Study #28
    (Kuhn & Tucker), Princeton 1953, 291-301.

18. David Singmaster, Almost all games are first person games,

19. C. A. B. Smith, Graphs and composite games, J. Combinatorial Theory,
    1(1966), 51-81.

20. R. P. Sprague, Uber mathematische Kampfspiele, Tohoku Math. J.,
    41(1935-6), 438-444; Zbl. 13, 290.

21. , Recreation in mathematics (trans. T. H. O eirne) Blackie, 1963,
    #24 Odd is the winner, pp. 18,

22. H. Steinhaus, Definitions for a theory of games and pursuit, Mysl.
    Akad. Lwow 1, \# 1(1925), 13-14; reprinted in Naval Res. Logist.
    Quart. 7(1960), 105-108.

The principal books and papers published about Surreal Numbers since the
first edition of On Numbers and Games are:

Berarducci, Alessandro: Factorization in generalized power series.
Trans. Am. Math. Soc. 352, No.2, 553-577 (2000).

Beyer, W.A. and Louck, J.D.: Transfinite function iteration and surreal
numbers. Adv. Appl. Math. 18, No.3, 333-350, Art. No.AM9605 13 (1997).

Conway, John Horton and Guy, Richard K.: The book of numbers. Berlin:
SpringerVerlag. 1996.

Ehrlich, Philip (ed.): Real numbers, generalizations of the reals, and
theories of continua. Synthese Library. 242. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic
Publishers. 1994.

Gardner, Martin: Penrose tiles to trapdoor ciphers ... and the return of
Dr. Matrix. Rev. ed. Washington, DC: The Mathematical Association of
America. 1997.

Gonshor, Harry: An Introduction to the theory of surreal numbers, Lond.
Math. Soc. Lect. Note Ser. 110, Cambridge University Press, 1986 (Zbl
595.12017).

Lemire, Denis: Decompositions successives de la forme normale d n
surreel et generalisation des ?nombres. Ann. Sci. Math. Que. 21, No.2,
133-146 (1997).

Louck, James D.: Conway numbers and iteration theory. Adv. Appl. Math.
18, No.2, 181215 (1997).

Lurie, Jacob: The effective content of surreal algebra. J. Symb. Log.
63, No.2, 337-371 (1998).
