# The Long and the Short and the Small {#chapter-16-the-long-and-the-short-and-the-small}

... and there were present the Picninnies, and the Jobilillies, and the
Garyulies, and the grand Panjandrum himself, with the little round
button at top, and they all fell to playing the game of catch as catch
can, till the gun powder ran out at the heels of their boots. -Samuel
Foote (printed in Maria Edgeworth arry and Lucy Concluded )

This chapter discusses the ways in which long games (those with an
infinity of positions) may differ from short ones. We start with a
theorem which we have postponed from Chapier 9 so that it could serve as
the text for a sermon.

THEOREM 90. For every short game G which is not a number, we have the
translation property G+x= {Gi +xG\* + x}.

Proof. In the difference {Gt +xG? + x}-x+ {-G\*-G4

we see that the moves in the components other than -x have exact
counters, and so we need only show that there is no good move in - x.
But the move for Right to -x" takes us to the difference

{G' + xG + x} --(G + x") = H - K, say. But then H and K have Left and
Right values obtained respectively by

adding x and x ?to the Left and Right values of G, and so we cannot have

H\<K. Now this theorem ceases to hold for all long games. Let R denote
the set of all real numbers, and consider the games

A=RR, B=R, C=RRO

We shall find that 4, B, C have quite interesting properties. Of course
it would make no difference if we were to replace R by Z (say) in their
definitions.

The game A = +R plainly cannot have the translation property, since the
set R + x is identically the same set as R for all real x, and so we
should obtain the absurd equality A + x = A for all real x. The trouble
is that the Left and Right values of A do not exist, for the Left and
Right sections are not near numbers.

We can still compute these sections using Theorem 56, with max and min
replaced by sup and inf. We find L(A) = sup R(x), over all real x, so
that L(A) is the section, which it is natural to call oo, between all
real numbers and all larger numbers. In a similar way, we find R(A) =
-0oo, L(B) = , R(B) = L(0), L(C) = R(C) = .

So A is confused with all real numbers (and therefore with numbers
between them), but lies strictly between any infinite negative number
and any infinite positive one (say -w ? and w?/@). Ina similar way, B is
confused with real numbers greater than or equal to 0, but greater than
all negative numbers and less than infinite positive ones. The game C is
a little more interesting, since it is confused with no numbers, having
all real numbers to its left and all infinite positive numbers to its
right.

For G to have the translation property, it suffices that one of the two
sections L(G), R(G) should be ext door to ?some number y, that is to
say, should have the form L(y) or R(y). So for instance, B has the
translation property.

The temperature theory of Chapter 9 works wholesale for the Class of all
games that have only finitely many stopping positions. We need only
replace the words yadic rational ?by umber ?whenever they occur. For
these games we can still draw thermographs, although the coordinate axes
must have space for arbitrary numbers. In particular the mean value G,,
always exists for such games, although for games with infinite
temperature it can be a pretty useless concept.

Thus the game {1 + w 1 - @} has mean value 1, but since it is infinitely
hot (t = @) it is not true that m.G is necessarily very nearly m.1, and
indeed for all odd m, m.G = {m + wm - a} is confused with all real
numbers. With a slightly more complicated G we could make this hold for
even m as well.

There are many more games for which the temperature theory works, but it
is plainly not true that (for instance) every game has a mean value, in
any reasonable sense. For since the game C lies between all real numbers
and all positive infinite numbers, we should expect the same to be true
of its mean value, which therefore could not be any number.

The game C is constructed in the same sort of way as the game considered
in Chapter 10. In general, for any set S of numbers consider the game G
= SS -x, where -x is less than every member of S. Then it is easy to see
that the Left and Right sections of G are both the section R(S) ust to
the right ?of S-that is to say, lying to the right of every number in S,
but left of all greater numbers. Moreover, using Theorem 55 it is very
easy to see that if H is any game greater than every number in S, then G
\< H for all sufficiently large ordinals x. In particular, the positive
game +, = 0 -acan be made less than any given positive game by choice of
a, and so these games really do end to 0 ?as ends to On ? In a similar
way, the game R R -a tends downward towards the real numbers as a tends
to On.

We can use the same idea to investigate the largest infinitesimal games.
Letting R\* denote the set of all strictly positive real numbers, we see
that the game 1 R\* R\* is an infinitesimal game strictly greater than
all infinitesimal numbers, and that if we were to replace 1 here by a
large ordinal we could obtain an arbitrarily large ?game with these
properties.

## GAMES OF ODD ORDER

It is easy to see that there can be no short game G satisfying the
equation G+G+G=1, for this equation implies that the mean value of G is
4, whereas the mean value of any short game is a dyadic rational. On the
other hand, there is a long G with this property, namely the number G =
4. We shall see that there are others in a moment.

Now Theorem 89 of Chapter 15 shows us that there exist short games whose
order is any desired power of 2, and Norton has generalised the
construction we gave immediately after that theorem for producing
submultiples of Tf, and deduced in particular that there are long games
of all finite orders. We repeat his argument.

Let G be positive, and let H satisfy H - K \> all G - G\*, G4 - G, and
2K = G,where K = {HG - H} \> 0. Then for numbers x define ultiples ? x.
G (depending also on H) as follows. For x a finite integer, define x. G
to be the sum of the appropriate number of copies of G or -G. For other
numbers x = {x"x"}, define x.G = {x ?G + Hx.G - H}. (When we want to
emphasize the dependence on H, we can write x,,,,G. Thus for example we
have i = /- ) Then it is easy to see that (ety). G=x.G+y.G, and hence in
tata that .G = X satisfies the equation X + X + X =G. For G = 1, H =, we
find that 4 ,1 satisfies X + X + X=1, but X \# 4, (since its Left and
Right values are different), and so X - } has order 3. Obviously we can
construct games of any finite order like this.

But Norton has also proved what was quite a long-standing conjecture,
that no short game has odd order. We follow his proof now. We call G! -
G the incentive of the move from G to G4, and G - GF the incentive of
that from G to G, since these quantities measure the value of these
moves to the player making them. Now we shall call G balanced if in
whatever form G is taken, for each irreversible move from G there is a
move for the other player of at least as great an incentive. (In fact it
can be shown that G is balanced provided only that this condition holds
for the simplest form, but we do not need this.)

THEOREM 91. If G has finite order, then G is balanced.

Proof. Suppose n.G = 0, and consider a typical option of G, say G".
Since G\* + (n - 1).G \<i 0, we have either

some G'\* + (n- 1).G \<0 or some G" + GF + (n- 2).G \<0.

In the first case the move to G# is reversible, and in the second case
the move to G has at least as great an incentive. The argument applies
to every form of G.

It follows of course that if G is of finite order, then every multiple
of G is balanced. The next theorem shows that any short game with the
latter property has order some power of 2, and so, together with the
previous theorem, establishes Norton result.

THEOREM 92. If G is born on day g, and 25.G is balanced, then 2.G = 0.

Proof. We suppose that all positions of G are in simplest form, and
consider expressions of 2%.G in the form

2.G=a.2).H+b.2% IJ + .2.K+...,

where H, J, K,... are distinct positions of G or -G born on the
respective days h,j,k,..., and a,b,c,... are positive integers. We shall
show that if any one of H, J, K, ... is non-zero, the expression can be
replaced by a simpler one of the same type, so that by repetition we may
reduce the particular expression 29.G to 0.

We compare the simplicity of two such expressions E and F as follows.
Enumerate the positions of G and -G in any way which ensures that each
position precedes all positions born on later days, and that any
position H is adjacent to its negative -H, unless these coincide. Then
call E simpler than F if the latest game of this list that occurs in
just one of E and F is in F.

Now consider such an expression, with H, J, K,... not all zero. Then one
of these games has a move (say the move from H to H\*) whose incentive
is not strictly exceeded by the incentive of any other move from any of
H, J, K,.... If several moves have equal incentive, we suppose further
that H is the possibility that appears latest in our list. Then the move
from the given form of G to

He +(a.2%--1).H+ bd. 4...

is either reversible or there is some move for Right of at least as
great an incentive. Considering the various possibilities, we obtain an
inequality of one of the forms:

HY + J + (a.2\*--1).H 4+ (b.2%-V.I +... 524.6 AY + AR 4 (a.2" - 2).H 4+
b.2.F 4+...\< 246 HER + (4.2% - 1).H+ 6.27.7 +...\< 29.G

and so one of H## -\~H\<J---J, H\*}-H\<H- HF, HR \< H.

Since the move from H to H ?had maximal incentive, we must have equality
in the first two cases, and since H is in simplest form, the third case
cannot happen. But now we can simplify the given expression by replacing
the term a.2".H by

a.2".J + 4.2" (-J) +.a.2".H or a.2*-).H* 4+ a.2'-)\_ HR

in the two cases. The new expression is strictly simpler than the
original, and still enjoys the property that the coefficient of any game
born on day n is divisible by 2 ? (The strictness of the simplification
follows from the fact that the games J, -J, H*; H all appear strictly
before H in our list.) As we remarked, we can now repeat the process to
show that if 2.G is balanced, and in particular if G has finite order,
then 27.G = 0, showing that the order is a power of 2. We already know
short games whose orders are arbitrarily chosen powers of 2, and some
games of order 4 (of the form x* - x for numbers x) actually arise as
positions in our games of dominoes and SNORT. It is probable that in
these two games we can also find positions of orders 8, 16,..., etc.

Norton and I have slightly extended the argument of Theorem 92 so as to
show that for any short game G and odd number n, G is expressible as an
integral linear combination of the positions of n.G, in no matter what
form n.G is taken. So for instance there is no short game G with 3.G =
T, since

no game of the form a.f + b. satisfies this equation. The Class No of
surreal numbers is defined as a Subclass of the Class Pg of

games by the hereditary requirement that every game G in it satisfy G
?\< G\< G*, for all G ?and G. Norton has also established a conjecture
of mine that any game G for which G ?\< G\< G* holds for all G*, G* is
already a number. In other words, any game other than a number is
confused with some one of its options.

Perhaps the most significant way in which long games may differ from.
short is the lack of any theory of canonical forms for general -long
games. We showed in Chapter 10 that every short game had a unique
simplest form, distinguished by having neither dominated nor reversible
moves. Now for long games we certainly cannot hope to omit dominated
moves,

for example in the game w = {0, 1, 2,3,...} every move is dominated, and
we certainly cannot omit them all! But of course we can omit certain
infinite sets of moves without affecting the value-for instance we have

@ = {1, 2,4, 8, 16, 32,...}.

So we do not expect a simplest (i.e. smallest) form.

On the other hand, we can ensure that a quite arbitrary game has no
reversible moves. We recall from Chapter 10 that the move from G to G ?
is called reversible if we have some G ?\< G, and that we may then
replace G" by the set of all G ?# (for this G ? without affecting the
value of G. Now we may do this simultaneously for all reversible G ?(and
G) and repeat until no move is reversible, and we are not led into an
infinite regress, for this would entail an infinite sequence

L QLRL GLRLRL GLRLRLRL G", G' ?,G G 3

any

and so an infinite play of G. The argument by which we proved Theorem 69
now proves that if G and H are free of reversible options, then we have
G = H iff each G ?\< some H", each H ?\< some G*, each G* \> some H, and
each H \> some G, or in other words, two games without reversible

ptions are equal if and only if each option of either is dominated by a
corresponding cption of the other.

It does not seem to be possible to do better. In particular, Norton has
disproved a fairly long-standing conjecture (the ancestors conjecture)
by producing two forms for a certain long game G with the property that
G cannot be expressed in terms only of the positions common to both
forms. This cannot happen for a short game G, since the theory of
Chapter 10 shows that then every position in the simplest form of G
arises as the value of a position in every form of G. Norton game is

G = {00,0\] -2,...} and {0/0 -1,0 -3,...}.

The following result was promised in Chapter 15. Although it refers to
all games its main applications seem to be in comparing the sizes of
very large or very small games, so we give it here. In particular, it
has an important application to the calculus of atomic weights which we
shall describe shortly. We say that involves X ?to mean that some
position of G has value X. Recall that X: Y denotes the ordinal sum,
defined inductively by:

X:Y = {X4, X:Y" X, X: Y%}.

THEOREM 93 (Norton lemma). X and X:Y have the same order-relations with
all games G not involving X.

Proof. Since for any Y there is some ordinal with -a \< Y \< a(Theorem
55), we are reduced to proving that X and X:a (or X: -a) have the same
order-relations with all games G not involving X. Taking obvious
inequalities into account, this amounts to proving that

X:a\>GimpliesX \>G and X \< Gimplies X:\<G for every positive ordinal a
From the definition, we have Xia = {X*,X:B X*},

where \# ranges over the ordinals less than .

Suppose first that X:a \> G, but X \<li G. Then there must be a good
move for Right from X - G. But his move to X\* - G is also available
from X:a- G, and so this must be to X - G", say. Since X is not involved
in G, it cannot be involved in G4, and so from X \< G" we can deduce
inductively that X:a \< G\*, contradicting X:\> G.

So we must suppose that X \< G, but X:a \> G. What is Left good move
from X:a- G? Certainly not to X" - G, for this is available also from X
-G; and not to X:a - G, for this implies X:\> G, so inductively X \> G\*
contradicting X \< G. So we must suppose that Left good move is to X:B -
G for some ordinal 8 \< a But now we have X:f 2 G, and so inductively X
2G, which combines with the assumption X \< G to show that X = G is
involved in G.

Before we proceed to the applications to small games we deduce the
corollary promised in Chapter 15.

THEOREM 94. If neither X nor Y has a reversible move, then neither does
X:Y.

Proof. Suppose to the contrary that X:Y has a reversible move, say for
Left. What is this move?

If it isa move to X4, reversed to X", we have X ?\< X:Y, so by Norton
lemma X"\* \< X, since X"\* does not involve X, showing that after all X
had a reversible move to X.

If it is to X: Y ? reversed to X, we have X \< X:Y, which is impossible
since X\* is a Right option of X:Y.

Finally, if it is to X: Y4, reversed to X: Y ? we have X:Y"\* \< X:Y.
But from Chapter 15 we know that X:Y is a sop function (strictly order
preserving) in Y, so we must have Y/\* \< Y, showing that after all Y
had a reversible move to Y.

Now we know that in general the value of X: Y depends on the form of X,
rather than only on its value. But we can use our earlier remarks to
select an absolute ?version, defined as X:Y for forms X and Y without
reversible options. It is easy to see that if X, and X, are forms of the
same game neither

of which has a reversible option, then X,: Y = X,- Y, for each option of
any of these is dominated by a corresponding option of the other.
Theorem 94 now further shows that X:(Y:Z) = (X:Y):Z under this
convention, for no new reversibility is introduced on either side. Of
course, since X:Y is a sop function of Y, its value depends only on the
value, and not the form, of the second variable Y.

## THE GAMUT OF GAMES

We are now sufficiently well-informed to present a fairly complete
picture of the possible types of magnitude for positive games. To fix
our ideas, we first discuss the possible sizes of numbers. . 1 . very
small: numbers like -, -,...,- for large ordinals ; wo ow a

fairly small: numbers like 2 3 -\_ - wee i a w/a Jo @

ordinary sized: numbers like ;35, 3, 1, 2, 100:

w\*;

fairly large: numbers like 30, ./@, w! ? w ?; and very large: numbers
like w, w?,..., @, for large ordinals .

If is a large ordinal we can say that the smallest, infinitesimal
numbers are like 1/a, and the largest like 1/(w1 ?, while the smallest
infinite numbers are like w' and the largest like a.

When we add general games the above scale needs enlarging at several
points. So we now consider:

## GAMES IN THE GAPS

In Chapter 3 we discussed the gaps in the number line. Only some of
these gaps can contain games, since it follows from the discussion in
Chapter 9 that the gaps L(G) and R(G) must each be upper or lower bounds
of nonempty sets of numbers. Every gap with this property has the form
x + w\* or x - w, where x is a number and E another gap that is the
upper or lower bound of a set. But now the gap may be On or - On, which
do not contain games, since they are the lower and upper bound of the
empty set.

These remarks show that it suffices to discuss the games that lie in
gaps of the form w, which have the property that the sum of any two
games from the gap is again in the gap. The particular case = = -On,
when a is the gap 1/On containing small games, is rather special and
will be discussed later. Otherwise = is either the upper or lower bound
of a non-empty set, which gives two cases in the argument.

The gap typifies the first case. The smallest games in this gap have
already been described-they are the games oo, = RR -for large ordinals .
The largest games present rather more of a problem. It turns out that
they are the games 00% defined inductively by

co! = 0 = RRR

co\* = {008 .n 008.n -co8.n} ifa\>2

where B ranges over all the ordinals less than a, and n over all the
positive integers.

There are some interesting identities between these games. If x is a
finite number, then co,,, = 0, - x. But the most interesting results
concern the game oo itself. We have co + 00 = oO, (the game C of our
introduction to this chapter), and also the equalities

RR= +0, RO=0f0=(2.0)(0=ao+0, woltao=aot,, wllol0 =2.0, Some similar
equalities exist involving higher powers of 00%.

Now let Q be another gap of the form w ,where & is the upper bound of a
non-empty set. Then we can define games

Q, = {o*.n o*.n - Wes Q? = {w*.n w*.n -O\* 1} cs, n=1,2,3,...

Y = {Q?.n OF .n - OF 1} 5 \<a n=1,2,3,..2

and it turns out that the Q, are the smallest games in Q, and (% the
largest. The gap 1/co typifies the other major case. We can define

(1/co), = {a R\* R\*}

where R\* denotes the set of positive reals, and these games are the
largest in 1/00. To find the smallest we need a more complicated
construction, defining games

co ?(x) = {x\] R\* R\* R\*}

c0\~%x) = {x\] 07 Ay) 007 %(y) OPO} e+, pce where is any positive
ordinal and x any number. Then it turns out that the games oo (x), or
even just co \~= oo %(1), are the smallest games in 1/00.

In the general case in which Q = @, and is the lower bound of a nonempty
set S, we can define

Q, =  ot ot n n seS 1 1 Q,(x) =   ot o.- oni} n n N) ses

QUx) = {x Q,(y) I Q,(y) Il QQ} ,\>0.8\<e

(Since Q is the lower bound of a set, the impropriety in letting y range
over all numbers greater than Q is only apparent). I do not know why
Q,(y) must appear three times in this definition.

The case + = 1/On is special. However, it is easily solved. We have
already shown that +, = 0-a are the smallest games in this gap. The
largest are the games co*.T, the multiples of T by the largest games in
the gap oo. This remark shows perhaps most conclusively that there is no
natural definition of x.1 if x is an infinite number, for there is no
game greater than all the games oo*.T and less than all positive
numbers.

## THE GAMUT REVEALED

We use x for a positive number, possibly further restricted, and for an
arbitrary ordinal. Then we have:

The very smallest games + 4, +4)... +o:--- t+

The smallest all smalls +, , (x finite). + .0.)

The t scale 1,17, T,..., fo, wag I

Largest below t+ *01, #012,* 0123,...012... 8... (8 \< a) (defined
soon).

Multiples of T 1, %,...,x.T (finite x).

Largest small games oo .1, 00?.T,..., c0%.T.

The smallest infinitesimal numbers 1/w,...,1/a.

The largest infinitesimal numbers 2/, 1/ Jo, .., Lf/al,

The next smallest games co\~!, *,..., 07* = co ?I1).

The largest infinitesimal games R\* R\* = (1/00),.

The finite numbers 535, 4, 1, 2, 100,....

The smallest infinite games oo, = RR -.

The largest games in 00 0\* = 00%. n co8 .n - 008 .n.

The smallest infinite numbers w/2, ./o, o'/ w@/\*,

The largest infinite numbers w, w.2,...,@,...,@%.

We note that it is the Archimedean principle that tells us that the
numbers really do end to On ?in the sense that every game is less than
all sufficiently large ordinals. It is a fairly easy deduction that +,
really does end to 0 ? in the sense that any positive game is greater
than some +.,.

It is also easy to see that if x and y are numbers with x \< y, then for
the corresponding tiny games we have +, infinitesimal with respect to
+,, so that in these games we have a scale of infinitesimals. And we can
also let x vary over the infinite numbers less than @, or over some
class of games between the finite and infinite numbers, so that even the
tiny world has a very rich structure. The smallest all small games have
the form +,, ,) where x is a finite number if we want a short game, but
may be oo\* if we llow long ones. While we are still on the subject of
tiny games, we might remark that it is amusing to verify that for any
game G, we have +, =T, so that in particular, f is the unique solution
of G = t+ . \*

We can use Norton lemma to show that the game +, is smaller than any
positive all small game G, as follows. We find that {x 0}: 1 can be
expressed as {x} + ,, so that {x} and {x} +. have the same
order-relations with {x} + G, since this does not involve {x}.

## THE SUPERSTARS, AND THE GAME OF SUPERNIM

The games xabc..., which we call the superstars, are defined by the

equation 4 xabc... = Tx + {#a, *b,* c,... #0, , \*2,...},

where the sequence 0, 1, 2,... on the right is long enough to include
the mex of all the numbers a, b, c,... on the left. If S is the set of
numbers a, b,c, ... we sometimes write *S for* abc.... These games arise
naturally in several places, and have the following properties

1.  IfS has a single element s, say, then +S = xs as usually defined.

2.  IfS isa proper subset of T, then *S \<* T.

3.  We have \< +S iff ne S (and otherwise \*S).

4.  We have *S \< Tx + iffn S (and otherwise T+ +* n). There is also a
    restricted translation-invariance property-if the set T has the form
    S +, n for some n, then *T =* S + \*n for the least such n. (Here S
    +,ndenotes {s +,nseS}.)

A supernim position is a game of the form

G= {*a, xb, C,... Q, +B,* ),.. +}

which has both Left and Right options which are all Nim-heaps. For such
games we have the identities

G = +m if both sets S = {a,b,c,...} and X = {a, B,y,...} have the same
mex m.

G = + if S has the smaller mex. G = Tx + if = has the smaller mex.

So every supernim position is either equivalent to a Nim-heap or to one
of form {xa, *b,* c,... *0, #1,* 2,...} or {*0, #1, #2,... #a,* b,
xc,...} in which we may suppose that one side or the other contains all
numbers we like. We call the former type Right terms and the latter Left
ones.

We assert that in a sum of such terms (including Nim-heaps) Left will
win if he has at least two more terms than Right, or at least one more
and the advantage of having first move. He wins in fact by destroying
Right terms as quickly as possible (replacing them by arbitrary
Nim-heaps). When it is his move and he has destroyed them all, there
will still be at least one Left term left. If there is exactly one such,
Left can replace it by a Nim-heap of just such a size as to make the
resulting Nim-position have value zero. If there are just two such
terms, Left can replace one by a Nim-heap so large that Right (who is
restricted in his choice for the other) cannot replace the other by one
which makes the Nim-game have zero sum. Finally, if there are three or
more Left terms remaining, Left can afford to replace any one of them by
an arbitrarily chosen Nim-heap and Icave further decisions to his next
move.

This argument proves that any sum or difference of terms +S is
infinitesimal with respect to ft. We shall use this property later. The
remaining cases, in which the mover as one less term than his opponent,
present a more difficult problem. But if each player follows the policy
of destroying his opponent terms, his opponent can do no better than to
do likewise, and the game reduces to the game of supernim.

In this game, each player has a number of cards, each card being
labelled with a number of Nim-heaps it may be exchanged for. It does no
harm to suppose that initially the two players have the same number of
cards. The players then alternately declare their cards, replacing them
by one of the permitted Nim-heaps. When all cards have been declared,
they play the resulting Nim-game to decide the winner. (Notice that in
this translation Left terms have become Right cards).

The sum \* + *T+...- +*U - \*V... has then the same outcome as the
supernim game in which Left has cards corresponding to the sets S,
T,...and Right cards corresponding to U, V,....In particular we see that
the outcome of such a sum is unchanged when we replace the numbers
appearing in the sets S, T;..., U, V,... by any other numbers with the
same Nim-sum relations. There does not appear to be a complete theory,
and we shall consider in detail only the case when the numbers appearing
are chosen from 0, a, b, c, where c =a+,b.

In this case the restricted invariance principle allows us to suppose
every term is one of *0a,* 0b, 0c, *abc, or* Oabc (or their negatives)
together with Nim-heaps +0, , \*b, xc which we can combine if we like.
(For most of the game they have a rather negligible effect.)

Then a term \*Oabc is greater than any sum of other terms.

(For a player with a card bearing all labels 0, a, b, c obviously wins
by declaring it to have the appropriate value right at the end of the
game: we suppose of course by cancellation that his opponent has no such
card.)

If there is no term *Oabc, the terms xabc +* 0a (say) beat any
combination of other terms.

(For a player holding the two corresponding cards can at his next to
last declaration choose 0 or a so as to ensure that his last declaration
wins the Nim-game.)

A term *0a is not beaten by any sum of terms* Ob, and Nim-heaps.

(For the player holding it can at his last declaration choose 0 or a so
that his opponent (who must declare 0 or b say) cannot correct the
resulting Nimgame to have zero value.)

Finally, the term *0a (or any multiple thereof) beats only the Nim-heaps
xO and* a.

Since we can always add terms +0 so as to balance the number of terms on
each side, the above theory handles all supernim games in which all
labels are chosen from 0, a, b, c, and all sums or differences of such
superstars.

The superstars play an important role in the atomic weight calculus, to
which we now proceed, since they include the largest games of atomic
weight Zero.

## THE THEORY OF THE SMALL WORLD. ATOMIC WEIGHTS

Perhaps this is the most useful and intriguing topic of this chapter;
the theory of magnitude in the small world, developed jointly by Norton
and the author. We use the term small world for the large family of
games whose sizes are most naturally measured in units of f. The small
world behaves in many respects like the large one, but often with a
fundamental ncertainty ? of size about f or f which makes exact
calculation rather difficult. The main achievement is the calculus of
atomic weights, measuring small games in terms of f, which enables us to
use the mean-value calculus in the small world.

Because the complete theory is rather difficult and does not yet seem to
be in final form, we omit several proofs. Norton hopes to present a
complete account of this theory and his extensions of it in due course.

## COMPARING G WITH THE STARS. REMOTE STARS AND ATOMIC WEIGHTS

We need to be able to decide for which n we have +n \> G or \< G.
Accordingly we define the Above and Below classes of G by:

A(G) = class of n with xn \> G B(G) = class of n with \< G.

THEOREM 95. Suppose the Above and Below classes known for all options of
G. Define A as the class of n not in any B(G*), and B as the class of n
not in any A(G). Then if A has the smaller minimum (or B is empty), we
have A(G) = A and B(G) empty, while if B has the smaller minimum or A is
empty we have A(G) empty and B(G) = B. Finally, if A and B have the same
minimum m, then we have G =* m, and so A(G) = B(G) = {m}.

(The proof is a fairly easy calculation.)

It follows from this algorithm that the comparison of G with *n is
ultimately independent of n. Either for all sufficiently large n we have
G \>* n or for all sufficiently large n G \< *n, or G is incomparable
with all sufficiently large . For short games G the comparison becomes
constant for n larger than the number of moves in G, but for long games
we might need an infinite ordinal number for n. But in any case we can
speak of comparing G with the remote stars. It turns out that the result
of this comparison plays an important role in determining the atomic
weight of G-this fact we might call Mach principle for the small world.
For the sake of precision we shall call* n a remote star if xn is not
involved in G, and suppose G a short all small game.

Then the exact form of Mach principle is that the atomic weight of G is
at least 1 if and only if G exceeds the remote stars. Since we have not
yet defined atomic weights, we interpret this for the moment in the
form:

THEOREM 96. If G exceeds the remote stars, then for any finite N the sum
of N + 2 copies of G exceeds the sum of N copies of f.

Proof. Let *n be a remote star. Then if G \>* n we have G \> ():1 by
Norton lemma. But

():1 = {x0, #1,...,42 #0, #1,...,\*(2 - 1)} = fe - #01...(n - 1).

The desired assertion now follows from the analysis of supernim.

## THE SUPERCOOLING FUNCTION G'

Let t be a real number satisfying 1 \< t \< 2. Then there is a
supercooling

function G ?defined for all short all small games G. This is defined in
exactly the same way as the ordinary cooling function G, of Chapter 9,
but with a different and more subtle proviso. In fact G ?is defined by
the inductive

definition G = {G" - G\* + 4}

except possibly when there is more than one permitted integer N, that is
to say, more than one N which satisfies

G ?-t\<iN \<iG\* +t

for all G*, G*. In this excepted case, G' is defined as:

the largest nermitted integer (necessarily positive) if G exceeds the
remote stars

the least permitted integer (necessarily negative) if G is exceeded by
the remote stars

the integer zero (necessarily a permitted integer) if G is incomparable
with the remote stars.

To summarise, we may say that G' is defined by the inductive formula G'
= {G" - t G\* + t} except that when we are faced with a choice between
several integers we choose not the simplest, but rather the greatest,
least, or the number zero according to the remote star criterion. The
amazing result, which we do not prove here is:

THEOREM 97. The supercooling function is a homomorphism (from short all
small games to games). In other words, we have (G + H)' = G' + H", and
(-G) = --G..

There are some difficulties in defining a supercooling function for
other values of t. For t \> 2 there is no difficulty, however. We can in
fact define G' consistently for all t \> 1 by use of the equation G'\*"
= (G'),, which will hold whenever both sides are defined. For 0 \< t \<
1 there are several alternative definitions which achieve the same
result, but no one is particularly satisfactory, and there are even
worse problems for t = 0.

The most important case is t = 2, and so we write G ?for G\*, and call G
? the atomic weight of G. In fact the atomic weight determines G' for
allt \> 1 (for t \> 2 by cooling, and for t \< 2 by eating up ?, so that
we do not need G' for any t other than 2. The following omnibus theorem
collects atomic weight information:

THEOREM 98. (i) We have G ?= {G\*" - 2G ? + 2} except that when this

permits more than one integer, G ?is the largest or least permitted
integer or is zero according as G \> *n,G \< , G* n for remote .

1.  Atomic weights are additive-so (G + H)' = G" + H ?(-G)" = -G ?,

2.  G ?\> 1 iff G exceeds remote stars.

3.  G" \< -1 iff Gis exceeded by remote stars.

4.  IfG" \> 2, G is positive, and if G ?\< -2, G is negative.

5.  If G ?i\> 0, then Gi\> 0, and if G ?\<0, then G \<i 0.

6.  For G = X = x.f, we have G ?= x. In particular, the atomic weight of
    t is 1. Also the atomic weight of tx is 1 for x \> 0.

7.  The atomic weights of t\* (x \> 1), \*n, xabc..., are all zero.

Let us compute the atomic weight of the game {0f, t+} which we called
+1;1 in Chapter 15. Here G\* ?has weight 0, and each G\* has weight 1,
and so the inductive formula gives {0 - 2 1 + 2}, which permits the
three integers 0, 1, or 2. So the atomic weight of G will be 0 or 2
according as G is incomparable with or exceeds the remote stars. So we
must use our method for comparing G with the stars.

Here we have B(G") = {0}, and so A is the complementary class {1, 2, 3,
...}. Again, A(G*) is empty for each G, since we have no* n \> f or fx,
and so the class B contains all integers, B = {0,1,2,...}. Since B has
the smaller minimum (0), it ins ? and we have A(G) empty, B(G) ull ? so
that in fact G exceeds all stars, and in particular, the remote ones. So
the atomic weight of G is the largest permitted integer 2.

Now let us consider the game {t {}. Here the inductive formula reads
{2 - 2 -1 + 2} = {0 1}, and since there is no integer between 0 and 1
this already gives the correct answer 3. So atomic weights need not be
integers. The example {} = + 4 shows that they need not even be numbers,
for here the inductive formula gives {2 - 2 -2 + 2} = {0} = for the
atomic weight. In fact we saw in Chapter 15 that in a natural sense the
product of f and \* is + + \*, and so on taking atomic weights we have

= ( t)" + (+), whence indeed (+ft) ?= \*.

Nevertheless the atomic weights of simple games tend to be numbers, and
even integers, since after all the atomic weight is a kind of cooling
function. This nice property is of course counterbalanced by a nasty one
we cannot assert that a game of positive atomic weight is positive, but
only that it is positive or fuzzy. To achieve positivity of G we must
know that G atomic weight is at least 2, although if its weight is 1 or
more we can assert that G exceeds almost all stars.

## ATOMIC MASS THERMOGRAPHY

The atomic thermograph is a device for determining atomic weights, or to
be more precise, atomic mean weights G (the mean value of G ? or
equivalently the value of G ?for large t). Since for the inductive
calculation we need to compare G with the stars, we shall draw the
atomic thermograph like the ordinary thermograph, but write the members
of A(G) to its left, and those of B(G) to its right (Fig. 62):

Fic. 62.

Given atomic thermographs for the options of G we compute that for G as
follows. We adopt notation and conventions similar to those of Chapter
9, which the reader should consult in conjunction with this one. The
atomic thermograph has Left and Right boundaries (G) and R ?G) which are
computed by a rather more complicated rule than the boundaries L(G) and
R{G) of the ordinary thermograph for a large game G.

Tentatively we define

E = max R(G\*) -t, Rt = min Z(G) +t.

We obtain in this way two curves which are our first approximation to
the Left and Right boundaries. As t increases, the Left curve ultimately
tends diagonally rightward (ic. L ?decreases), and the Right one
diagonally leftward (R' increases). We must examine these curves at the
level t = 2. If the Left curve is in fact to the left of the Right one
at this critical level (ie. LE \> R' ?at t = 2), then they do indeed
define the Left and Right boundaries of the atomic thermograph until
they meet, from when both boundaries coincide in a single vertical line
(the mast).

If however the Left curve is to the right of the Right one at the
critical level (i.e. E \< R ?, then the atomic weight is a number, and
the atomic thermograph consists entirely of a mast at this number. In
this case G ?is the simplest permitted number (i.e. number x satisfying
E \< x \< R ?at t = 2) unless there are at least two permitted integers,
when G ?is that integer determined by the remote star criterion. Of
course to compare G with the remote stars involves

comparing it with all stars, and so computing the sets A(G) and B(G),
which we enter on the diagram as we compute it. Each such set either
contains almost all or almost no numbers, and it is this dichotomy which
settles the atomic weight of G in the critical case.

As an example we illustrate (fig. 63) the calculation of the atomic
thermograph for the game G = {3.TT, +f}. Here the thermographs for the
options

Fic. 63.

are supposed given, and the Left and Right curves EZ and R' cross below
the critical level t = 2. Since 2 is the simplest number between them at
this level, and is the only integer between them, the atomic weight is 2
and the thermograph a mast at 2, with A(G) empty, B(G) full (this is
indicated by the words one ? ll ?to left and right of the mast).

In Figs 64 and 65 we show the atomic thermographs for the games which
result when 3 .f is replaced by f, fT\*, 4.7, and 6 .f. In the first two
cases there are three permitted integers 0, 1, 2. But in the first case
we have A = {1}

First case Second case i

fee

Fic. 64.

oom

and in the second A = {0}, while B = {all} in every case. So in the
first case we have A(G) empty, B(G) = B full, while in the second case
A(G) = B(G) = {0} since then A and B have the same minimum. So in the
first case the remote star criterion gives G ?= 2, and in the second
case G ?= 0.

In the third case we have \[/ = 2, R'= 3 at t = 2, and so G ?is 23 by
the simplest number criterion. In the fourth case E = 4, R' = 3 at t =
2, and so the thermograph has a pyramid shape. We should point out that
we have assigned no meaning to that part of the atomic thermograph
corresponding to t \< 1, but it seems that the calculation is easier if
we draw this part nevertheless. \[For t \> 1 the atomic thermograph at
level t indicates the Left and Right values of the supercooled game
G'.\]

oO o 1 8S pp ali R \~ Fourth case\
G = {64f, + t} Third case  /. (64 G={4thtt} S L R ' ' aL \_t 1 l it i i
-L 5 4 3 2\$ 2 1 6 5 4 44 3 2 Atomic weight 2}. Atomic weight {4 3},

atomic mean weight 3}. (a) (b) Fic. 65.

In practice, calculation with atomic weights tends to be easier than the
above account might suggest, because the additional cooling effect tends
to make atomic thermographs simpler than ordinary ones for games of
roughly the same complexity.

Berlekamp and Wolfe have made effective use of another search operation,
hilling, ?in their theory of Go. They have also shown that this and
various notions of eating ?and verheating ?arise naturally in
Domineering and other games. See Mathematical Go: Chilling Gets the Last
Point, lockbusting and Domineering ?in the Journal of Combin. Theory
Ser. A; and ntroduction to Blockbusting and Domineering, ?from The
Lighter Side of Mathematics.

We conclude with a remark justifying our placing of the superstars in
the gamut of games.

THEOREM 99, Any short all small game G which has atomic weight zero is
infinitesimal with respect to ft and dominated by some superstar.

Proof. Since multiples of G also have atomic weight zero, they are less
than fl. Also H = ff\* - Ghas atomic weight 1 and therefore exceeds some
remote star*n. It follows from Norton lemma that H \> (*n): 1, and this
is equivalent to the assertion G \< \*01...(m--1).

The statement refers to fl rather than to T, because the superstars
themselves are infinitesimal with respect to ff but not with respect to
T, since in fact \*abc ... is incomparable with T if 1 appears among the
numbers a, b,c, ....

With this we conclude our investigations into the remarkable world of
ups, downs, stars, and superstars, observing that we have shown that
this small world behaves very like the large one, but with some extra
subtleties all its own. It seems that the theory of atomic weights is
about as complete as we could expect for games which are naturally
compared to T. But perhaps we can hope for an extended version of this
theory which would enable us to measure still smaller games in terms of
T?, T?, and so on. But the curious and complicated nature of the atomic
weight algorithm suggests that any such theory will be very difficult to
find. What do we expect to play the role of the remote stars, which
enter so mysteriously and essentially into our theory?

We leave these questions to others, who will surely find many other
problems to puzzle them and wonders to amaze and amuse them in this
curious world of games. Only a certain feeling of incompleteness prompts
us to add a final theorem.

THEOREM 100. This is the last theorem in this book.

(The proof is obvious.)
