# Ups, Downs, and Bynumbers {#chapter-15-ups-downs-and-bynumbers}

"Play up! Play up! and play the game! ?"

Sir Henry John Newbolt Vitat Lampada.

In this chapter, we return to our main theme of partizan games. In
particular, we wish to study various natural functions from games to
games. We introduce one important kind of function by discussing the
theory of a still more general form of Hackenbush.

## HACKENBUSH HOTCHPOTCH

We have already met Hackenbush restrained (in Chapter 8), and
unrestrained (in Chapter 13). In the restrained form, each edge could be
chopped only by its owner, and in the unrestrained form, each edge could
be chopped by either player.

In Hackenbush Hotchpotch, there are three kinds of edges, black (\])
which may only be chopped by Left, white (), which may only be chopped
by Right, and plain (), which may be chopped by either. The rules are
otherwise as in the earlier games, which are particular cases. Moreover,
the value of any position which has only plain edges may be found by
applying the theory of Chapter 13, and the value of many positions with
no plain edges by applying the ideas of Chapter 8.

Other values can be found in the usual way. So for instance, we have

A=(L. LL} = 0,\*} =1)1 =1 4%.

Now seems the appropriate moment to introduce an abbreviating convention
for such sums-if x is a number, and *n a Nim-heap, we write x for the
sum x + n. In the case n = 1, we abbreviate to* , and so we write x for

x + \*. This convention will be extended later in the chapter. So we
have the

equation / = 1x. In a similar way, we find

\- { ,---\[L-\_}= {, 0/0} = 1 + \* = Ts, say.\]}:1 is obtained by adding
new moves (to -1 for Left, 1 for Right) at each node of the tree for 1,
giving the game

= {-1,-1\]1\] = {-10\] =.

However, if the game G = {4, B,C,... D, E, F,...} is supposed to have no
reversible moves, we can define a function depending only on the value
of

G by G:X = {A,B,C,...D,E, F,...}:X,

since it turns out that if also H has no reversible moves, and H = G,
then H:X = G:X. Since every game G has a form without reversible moves,
the function G:X is defined for all G and X, and we call it the ordinal
sum of G and X.

As an example, we consider the ordinal sum dix, and restrict ourselves
at first to the case when x is a number. Since 5 = {0 1} without
reversible moves, }:x is defined by adding new options 0 for Left and 1
for Right at every position of x. In other words, we tell the creation
story over again, but examine only the space between 0 and I.

So for instance the simplest number born here is 4, so 4:0 = 4. The
simplest numbers to the left and right of this (but still between 0
and 1) are } and 3,

so 4:- 1 = 4, :1 = 32. Similarly, we find that for x = 4, 2, 3, ..., @,
the values of }:x are 3,7, 43,..., 1 -1/w.

In general, to see what x:y means when x and y are both numbers, we
refer to the tree in chapter 0, or equivalently, to the so-called
sign-expansions used in chapter 3. We get from 0 tox:y in the tree by
starting at the point x and making exactly those moves along the tree
which would get us from 0 to y. For example, we get from 0 to 3 by
moving right, left, right, and so we get from 5 to 5:3 by moving right,
left, right again, arriving at +. Similarly, @ steps leftward from } get
us to 1/aw, and so 3: - w = 1/w. In general, the sign-expansion of x:y
is that of x followed by that of y.

When x is a number and G is an arbitrary game, we can compute x:G as
follows. Play G until we get to its stopping positions (Chapter 9). In
the tree of G, replace each stopping position y by the ordinal sum x:y.
So for example ht l= Gali -0 \<3\]

When X is not a number, the behaviour of X: Y is more complicated. As a
general rule, we can say that we expect its value to be ery near ?that
of X, and this expectation is given a more formal.meaning by Simon
Norton theorem that X and X:Y have the same order-relations with all
games G not involving X (as a position). We shall give Norton proof of
this in the next chapter, and then deduce, following Norton, that X:Y is
free from reversible moves if X and Y are, and so that we have the
associative law (X:Y):Z = X:(Y:Z).

The particular case X = \* gives rise to a family of games that arise
very frequently. The same games can be defined in many ways, and the
order-relations in the group they generate together with the Nim-heaps
+n are completely known. For positive numbers x, and more generally for
games all of whose stopping positions are positive numbers, we define
the game 1x (pronounced p-x ? by the formula

\+ Tx = {0O}:x = #:x. It turns out that the same games can be defined by
the formulae Tx = {a}ix = { a}ix

under the same conditions on x. The negative of Tx is called x (down-x).
The following theorem, which we do not prove, gives the complete
structure of the group generated by the Tx and the , for numbers x.

THEOREM 88. Let X be a finite sum of terms Tx and y, in which all the
numbers x and y are positive, and no number x occurs also as a y (for
then we could cancel). Then X is positive if and only if either the
number of tx terms exceeds the number of y terms, or these numbers are
equal, and the least of the numbers x and y is a y. The game X + \* is
positive if and only if X +7 On is positive, where On temporarily
denotes any number bigger than all the x and y. The game X + , with n \>
2, is positive only if the number of Tx terms exceeds the number of y
terms.

It is often convenient, in seeing what this theorem tells us about the
size of the game fx, to use the following symbolic formula:

tx = TOn(1 - 1),

where T\* denotes he xth power of T ? If we suppose, as is natural, that
whenever x \> y \> 0, the xth power of 1 is infinitesimal with respect
to the yth power, and suppose tx \< fOn for all x, this formula gives us
the right order relations. Note that when we put x = 1, it yields the
symbolic formula

ton=-taa teat...

(the infinite series on the right side of this, is, like the whole
equation, purely formal, and should best be thought of as extending over
all ordinal numbers a).

So the games Tx, for 1 \< x \< On, are very close to f, being between T
and t+ 12 +13 +.... For integral x, they are the partial sums of this
series, thus

T2=7477, 1357477473...

The game 1? can be defined as {0 +}, and 1? as {0\*}, etc. So that we
can write ,, ,,... for their negatives, we pronounce these games
p-second ?

p-third ? etc., and the negatives similarly own-second ? own-third ? and
so on.

If we adopt these conventions, Theorem 88 tells us that the game \* is
confused with all sums between On and TOn, greater than all smaller
sums, and less than all larger ones. Note that we need not enquire about
the critical values On and TOn themselves, since these are not real
games, but purely formal symbols. The theorem also tells us that for n
\> 2, *n is confused with all sums with as many up terms as down ones,
but not with any other sums-an elegant way of putting this is that such
a* n is confused with a sum X if and only if \* is confused with X + X.
,

## SHRINKING RECTANGLES

In this game, played with a number of rectangles of integer sides, Left
may decrease the breadth of any rectangle, and Right the height. A
rectangle whose breadth or height is decreased to zero disappears. What
are the values?

Here since either player may shrink his coordinate to zero, the moves to
0 are always available from every position in the game corresponding to
a single rectangle. So such positions have the form \*:x for some x, and
when we try to tabulate them, it is obvious that a rectangle of breadth
b and height h has value :(b - h) which in our standard notation is +
T(b - h). So Theorem 88 can be used to give a complete analysis of this
game.

(Note. We define 1(-x) = -Tx = x for all x for which 1x is defined.)

## THE GAMES $\Uparrow$x, (3.$\uparrow$)x

It is sometimes convenient to define tx = {\[Ta}ix (3.T)x = { ta}sx,

and so on. The abbreviations Tx, t*,... mean Tf +* , 1+ T+ 4,..., and
fx, for instance, is pronounced ouble-up-star ? These definitions are

ival equivalent to pe ={\[Tix, B.Nxw = { tox... \]0}.

The games i and 3 are pronounced emi-up ?and esqui-up ?

The definition has the properties we should hope for, namely that X+y=X+
5, - = -%, etc. Moreover, these games can actually arise in eal-life
?games.

iw wP\>

## BYNUM'S GAME, AND TWISTED BYNUM'S GAME

The following game was suggested by Jim Bynum. Start with a rectangular
array of cards: later on in the game this will become a number of
separated arrays. Left moves by removing a vertical strip from just one
of these rectangles, and Right by removing a horizontal strip. The strip
length must be the full height or breadth of the rectangle respectively,
so that it splits the rectangle into two, unless it is removed from the
edge, when it leaves a slightly smaller rectangle.

We shall give an analysis of Bynum game at the end of the chapter, since
it seems to be one of the most interesting games we have studied. It is
fairly easy to see what the outcome is from any initial position
involving

12 3/4 5 6 7 8 9410 11 12 13 14 15

Doe tow \[Pde Pe toe fle Pet\]/0 , 9 , 0 1, pow poet Poe to owl tthe Pa
ts

8 0 0 , 0 0 0 , 0 0

9 toe \[ide Poe toe tde Toe 4\]o0 7 0 f7 0 f/0 fT 0 ror 13 t t? 2\* oe T
#1 P 3\* tT ofT \*

14 0 0 , 0 0 0 , 0 0 4

soe tow \[te Pe towel tie et

Fic. 59.

just one rectangle, but from arbitrary positions the theory is
incomplete, but will handle any position likely to be met with in
practice.

In the twisted form of Bynum game, before making any move, the player
must rotate the rectangle through one right angle. Otherwise the rules
are as before. When we tabulate the values (Fig. 59) the table exhibits
a periodicity which can fairly easily be proved to persist, and so we
have a complete theory.

Values for the twisted form of Bynum game.

In each row and column, the twelve entries after ithe first three recur
indefinitely. #means + , and da , 4 are the negatives of 5,

Notice that the values 12, T?, and +1 appear, as well as certain
submultiples of T. To see who wins any given, Position, proceed as
follows. If there 1 is any term -H{, this is the best move for the first
player-if not, a term + or at will be the best move, or failing that, +
or 3. When all these moves have been made, the value is in the group
considered in Theorem 88, and so the winner is known.

It is remarkable that a game with such a simple definition can at one
and the same time have a complete theory, yet such a complicated one in
play. The peculiar emphasis placed on numbers 6m + 5 is surprising.

## CUTCAKE

We digress for a moment to consider a game which is defined in a similar
way to Bynum game, but which turns out to have a very simple theory.

12345678988

1\[0 1\[2\]3\[4\]5\[6\]7\[8\]\[91 \[J 1)/2/)31;4)516;)7)8\]\]

Py =\_ 4

\*F10

al) \_5 0 1

12

?3 -2

14

=15}\_7

-16 -3 -8

-1

Fic. 60. Values of rectangles in cutcake.

The game is played with a number of rectangular pieces of thin cake,
already scored into squares by horizontal and vertical lines. Left moves
by breaking some piece into two smaller pieces by breaking it along some
horizontal line, and Right moves by breaking some piece along a vertical
line. When the cake has been completely broken up into squares of the
minimal size, the player who made the last move eats the cake.

Once again, the typical position is a disjunctive sum of positions
corresponding to the individual pieces of cake, and so we need only
tabulate values at these. Obviously pieces which are long in the
horizontal direction tend to favour Left, since he has more scope for
vertical breaks. But we think the complete answer is rather surprising.
See Figure 60.

So for instance a 4 x 7 rectangle still has value 0, although at first
sight it might appear to favour the player whose cuts in it are shorter.

## THE ANALYSIS OF BYNUM'S GAME

As always, the proper thing to do is to tabulate small positions and
their values. When we do this with Bynum game, certain patterns emerge:

1 2 3 4 5 6 1 \* J \* J \* J 2 tT \* X 'X\* Y YX = tt 3 -X x -X x -X Y =
XT 4 1 XTx XxX \* Y

Preliminary analysis of Bynum game These suggest the following result,
which we call the Theorem of 17 October: The values in Bynum game are
given by the following scheme

odd 2n--1 even 2n

odd even 2m

& Value: \* tnt {nt tnt m\*

Fic. 61.

where the game T1\* = T = 0+, and for larger n, Tn\* is the game, with
negative n\*, defined by the formula

tnt = {Tat + Tht b yon

Since Tn\* is positive for all n, we can add 0 as a Left option, if we
like, in this definition.

This theorem is equivalent to the assertion that Bynum game is
abstractly equivalent to the game soon to be defined, which we shall
call Bynumbers. We do not need to prove the theorem, since in play it is
very easy to see the correspondence between moves in the two games, or
prove that some of the moves are stupid ones. We deduce easily that the
initial rectangle in Bynum game is a win for the first player if both
coordinates have the same parity, and otherwise a win for the player
whose coordinate is even.

## THE GAME OF BYNUMBERS

Each player has a number of heaps of counters, and there may also be
some neutral heaps. Your legal moves are:

1.  to neutralise any one of your opponent heaps,

2.  to split any one of your own heaps into two non-empty parts,

3.  to throw away any neutral heap,

4.  to throw away one of your own heaps.

A heap of size n belonging to Left has value Tn*, so that one of the
same size belonging to Right will have value n*. Neutral heaps all have
the value +,

their exact size being immaterial. The moves allowed correspond to the
definition

tnt = {Tat + Tb\*,0 #}

which is valid for all n.

A great many results have been proved about this game, mostly by P. T.
Johnstone and M. R. Christie. We can summarise a number of them in
Christie strategic rules (in which we have supposed that any pairs of
neutral heaps have been cancelled, using \* + \* = 0):

at+b=n

One should usually prefer (a) to (b) to (c) to (d). The only exception
is that (b) may sometimes be preferred to (a), but only when the heap to
be split is the unique largest heap on the board, and there is no
neutral heap (and not always then). Moreover, any move of type (a)
should always be to neutralise one opponent largest heap.

When we say that one should prefer X to Y, we merely mean that if Yisa
good move, then so will X be, and not any stronger assertion. The proof
of these rules is quite subtle, but they make the play very simple, for
in many cases they leave only a unique move to be considered. In
particular, it is easy to see that a player who has two or more more
heaps than his opponent, or one heap more and the move, has an easy win.

In the further analysis, it is convenient to write tht = T+ Tt 4 Tt He
Tt,

Then the values f, 1?\*, T3+,... are all positive all small games, whose
order relations can be fairly easily investigated using Christie rules.
Any position in Bynum game is a sum of such values and their negatives,
together possibly with x,

But Christie rules show that when \* occurs and the first player has any
good move, then such a move is to neutralise his opponent largest heap,
or remove the neutral heap when the opponent has no heap. So to analyse
the game completely, we need only consider sums and differences of the
values t"\* (counting T = T1\*).

A rather surprising consequence of the rules is that if such an
expression is positive, it will remain positive however we change the
coefficients of those terms 1"\* that appear a negative number of times
in all. (For in the corresponding game of Bynumbers, coefficients less
than or equal to -2 will at the appropriate stage in the game cause the
largest heap to be non-unique, and then the players will alternately
neutralise each ther largest heaps until uniqueness is restored.) So
when testing whether such an expression is positive, we can suppose each
negative term appears with coefficient -1 when equal terms are collected
and cancelled with occurrences of their negatives.

From this it follows that there are only a finite number of basic
inequalities involving numbers up to any given size n, which Christie
and I have calculated up to n = 8. We have

12+ \> 13+ Trt 4 Tt \> 12+

(Here A \> B means that A exceeds any multiple of B), and these
inequalities, together with the fact that 1"\* is always positive,
suffice to imply all inequalities between sums of f1*,..., T8*.

Using the Theorem of 17 October, this analyses every position of Bynum
game in which no side of any rectangle exceeds 16 (and many other
positions).

The abbreviated list 1?7\* 13+ T5+, T?+ = T4\* suffices when no
rectangle has a side greater than 10.

Our remark that a player can win if he has a lead of two heaps, or one
heap and the move, means that in actual play one need only expand the
situation into a sum of terms {"\* when it is quite closely balanced.
Then we use the assertion that a sum of terms 1"\* and -1"\* will be
positive if and only if it can be expressed as a sum of terms chosen
from

Tit P24 0 f2t \_ N.13*, T2+ \_ N.14*,..., 14+ + 5+ - N.T8+

(corresponding to our list of basic inequalities), where the numbers N,
which need not be the same, can be arbitrarily large. So for instance in
the sum

q2+ \_ T3t + q4t + pot \_ Tet \_ Tit \_ T8+

we need a term 1?\* - N.T3\* to cope with the term - T?\*. Subtracting
this, we have (for a different N)

N.T3+ + q4+ + pot \_ Ter \_ tit \_ Tt.

But now we needaterm f3+ + 14\* -N.1+ - N.T7\* to account for the -T*,
since we have no longer a term {?*, and this leaves

N.13\* + T5\* + N.T\* + N.17\* - T8\*,

which is not positive, since no one of the basic inequalities can be
used to eliminate the term -18\*. ;

Of course such a sum can only be positive if the term T"\* with the
least n appears positively, and so the above sum is not negative either.
It follows that in a position with this sum as value, the first player
has the winning move. Such a position in Bynumbers is that where Left
has heaps of sizes 2, 2, 5, 5, and Right heaps of sizes 1, 3, 3, 8. The
reader might like to find winning moves for each of Left and Right as
first player.
