# Simplifying Games {#chapter-10-simplifying-games}

You boil it in sawdust: you salt it in glue: You condense it with
locusts and tape: Still keeping one principal object in viewTo preserve
its symmetrical shape. . Lewis Carroll, he Hunting of the Snark ?

One quite valuable way to simplify games is to simplify our notation for
them! (This is more important than it might seem, because even with the
best will in the world, the names of games can get inordinately long.)
So we first present some useful abbreviations.

We omit the curly brackets round games whenever this is possible without
too much confusion-so for instance we shall write A, BC for the game {A,
B C}. Next, we need some way of distinguishing between {{A B} C} and {A
{B C}}, and so we introduce as a tronger ?separator than , when these
games become ABC and A BC respectively. (A BC may be pronounced slashes
B slash C ?) Thus the game we used as an example for temperature theory
would now be called 7 5 4 1. Sometimes it is handy to introduce triple
slashes Ill but usually we can get along quite happily with judicious
use of brackets to supplement the above conventions.

The initial positions of many games are of the form

{A,B,C,... -A, -B, -C,..}

being symmetrical as regards Left and Right. So we introduce the
abbreviation +(A, B,C, ...) for this game. In particular, the notation
+G will mean {G -G}. Note that this will prevent us in future from
using + to denote an ambiguous sign, so that the phrase ?x or -x ?will
appear more commonly than usual from now on. Finally, there are many
positions of the form

{A, B, C,... A, B,C,...}

in which the moves for Left and Right are identical, rather than
symmetrical.

We shall use {A, B,C,...}

as an abbreviation for this game.

Some other notational conventions for particular games will be
introduced in our Chapter 15. A fairly complcie dictionary is given at
the end of the book.

However, the real simplifications we have in mind concern the form of G
rather than its name. The main problem is to see how we can simplify the
form of a given game without affecting its value. We first discuss some
modifications which might change the value, but in a predictable way.

THEOREM 67. The value of G is unaltered or increased when we (i)
increase any G" or G,

1.  remove some G or add a new G\*,

2.  replace the G by the K, for any game K \> G.

Proof. Let H be the game obtained by so modifying G. Then in the game
H - Git is easy to check that Right has no good first move.

Informally, it is even more obvious that these modifications are in Left
favour, for giving him new moves or prohibiting certain moves for Right
will not harm Left. These principles are used repeatedly in analysing
individual games, often in very much more general forms.

## DOMINATED AND REVERSIBLE OPTIONS

Suppose two different Left options of G are comparable with each other,
say G"! \< G ? Then we sav G" ?is dominated by G ? since Left will
plainly regard the latter as the better move. Similarly, if G! \> G\*
(note the reversed inequality) we call G: dominated by G\*.

Now suppose instead that the Left option G\* has itself a Right option
G"o say, for which we have the inequality G4%\> \< G. Then we say that
the move from G to G ?is a reversible move, being reversible through G\*
? Similarly a Right option G*: of G is reversible (through G*' ?) if and
only if it has some Left option G:"1 \> G. It turns out that whenever
one player (Left, say) makes a reversible move, his opponent might as
well reverse it (for he improves on the original position by so doing).
So instead of moving from G to G ? Left might as well move straight from
G to some G1%". A formal version of this result is part of the next
theorem.

THEOREM 68. The following changes do not affect the value of G. (i)
inserting as a new Left option any A \<i G, or as a new Right option any
Bie G.

1.  Deleting any dominated option

2.  If G\* is reversible through G\*\*, replacing G\* as a Left option
    of G by all the Left options G*" of G*Re,

3.  If G is reversible through G\* ?', similarly replacing G\* by all
    the GRibik

Proof. Because of the importance of this theorem, we give a more
detailed proof. Suppose first that A \<j G, and let H = {G", A G} be the
modified game in (i). Then in H - G the moves from H to G*, G* have as
counters those from -G to -G", -G\*, and conversely, and the move from H
to A yields the position A - G \<0 by assumption. So there is no good
move in H - G, whence H = G.

Part (ii) now follows, for if G ? is dominated by G ? and H denotes G
with G": deleted, we have G'! \< G ?j H, and so the insertion of G"â€†'!
will not affect the value of H. Recall the fact that for any game G and
any G4, G, we have G ?\<1 G \<i G, for from the difference G - G- or
G\* - G, Left can plainly move to 0. (This theorem is part of Theorem 0
of part 0!)

Part (iii) is the most important and least obvious part. Let us write G
= {G", GY G}, H = {Gho%ot, Gt' G}, where G ?denotes the typical Left
option other than G ?of G. Now consider the. difference

H - G = {GlRoL, Gt ? GR} +. {G -G, - G4}.

The moves from H to G ?or G\* and from -G to -G", -G\* counter each
other, so we need only consider those from H to Gh% and from -G to - G0,
The first of these is shown to be bad by

GroRol \< Goo \< G,

and the second is countered by the move from-G ?to -G*%, after which
Right is to move in the position H - G*%, His moves from -G4%e to -
GloRoL have counters in H, so he must move from H to G*. But this is a
bad move, since G - G*o \> GF - Grr 0.

Part (iv) follows by symmetry.

## THE SIMPLEST FORM OF A SHORT GAME

Now let G be a short game. We aim to find the simplest form of G. By
induction, we can suppose that each game G", G\* has already been put
into simplest form, if we like. In any case, we proceed as
follows-eliminate from G any option which is dominated by some other
option, and then replace any reversible option Ge or G! by the
corresponding smaller positions G %o ? or GR:4: respectively. Repeat, if
necessary, until no option of G is dominated or reversible.

THEOREM 69. Suppose that G and H (not necessarily short) have neither
dominated nor reversible options. Then G and H are equal if and only if
each Left or Right option of either is equal to a corresponding option
(Left or Right respectively) of the other.

Proof. Suppose G = H, and consider playing G - H. The move for Right to
G - H must have a reply for Left, say to either G ? - H or G - H. The
former case is impossible, for it implies G\* ?\> H = G, so that G was
reversible in G. So we have proved that for each G there is some H\*
with G \> H. Since similarly each H \> some G, and neither game has
dominated options, we must in fact have each G% = some H and conversely.
Similar statements hold for the Left options.

This theorem assures us that each short game has a unique simplest form.
We shall now discuss some examples.

Examples. The position {f t}. We know already that TI} \> Oly =t+t +s

obviously greater than \* = ia So 1 is reversible through $\alpha$ as a
Left option, and can therefore be replaced by + ?= 0. So we have {fT T}
= {0 T}. Since there is no 0%, 0 cannot be reversible in this (indeed, 0
can never be reversible in any game), and since {0 f} is positive (Left
can win, Right can ), t is not reversible as a Right option. So {t tT} =
{0 T} in simplest form.

(Recall that is the game {0 \*}, where = {0 0}.)

The game x y. Let x and y be numbers, and consider the game x y. Then if
x \< y, this is the simplest number between x and y, so we shall
consider the contrary case x \> y. Then plainly the game x y has no
dominated options. Moreover, its thermograph is the pyramid , y, and so
xy determines the numbers x and y. It must therefore be in simplest
form, for if the option y (say) were reversible, we should have xy = x y
? or {x}, which games have different thermographs.

Now we assert that for any number z, we have (x y) + z =(x + zy +z)

This is because in the difference (x y) +z + (-y - 2)(-x - 2)

the moves not in z have exact counters, while the move for Right (say)
from z to z is countered by Left move to -y - z, since by the
thermograph, we have x y \> y + (z - 2%).

This kind of translation invariance allows us to normalise x y to the
form u + v, where u = 4(x + y), v = 4x - y). Of course it holds only for
x \> y, and shows that in this region, x y exhibits a strikingly
continuous behaviour for all real numbers x and y.

tv= +0 y 2 1 rm +3 +1 0 3/ 1 2 ra +2 1 x \~2 u=2 -1 utov -42 2 ? u=1 u=4
L u=0 u=-}

Fic. 18. The game x y. Note: Points on boundaries here behave similarly
to the points just South-East ( ) of them.

Thegamex tatbt...+k.Letx,a,b,...,k be numbers. Since + tis its own
negative, and is zero if t \< 0, we can suppose thata \>b\>c\>...\>k20.
Then the thermograph of +a+b is sketched in Fig. 19. This shows that
-a+b\<+a+b\< +a - b. But this shows us that in the game

ta+b={atb,+a+b--a+b,+a-b}

a a---b 0 -a+b --a

Fic. 19. Thermographs of t+a+bandxtatb+t... +k.

the options ta + b and +a - b are dominated, for the difference between
the two options on either side is just that between ta + b anda - b.
Soin fact +ta+b={a+t b -a +}, for since we know the simplest form {a+b
a - b} of a+b, we can see that this option is not reversible. In a
similar way, we find that the simplest form ofx tatb+...+kis

{xta+b+...tkx-a+b+...+hk}

and that its thermograph is as shown.

Of course this uses the ordering a \> b \>... \> k, and is entirely
concordant with experience and expectations. For since the game +a
represents an advantage of a move to the first player to move in it,
when playing a sum of such games, the first player will take that with
the largest a, then his opponent will take the next largest, and so on.
In particular, the Left value will be x+a-b+c--...,and the Right
valuex-a+b-c+....

In practice it is often simpler not to normalise games x y to the form
u + v, but the rules still apply-in a sum of such games one should
always move in that with the largest diameter x - y. (The diameter as
here defined is twice the temperature of this game.)

## DOMINO POSITIONS AND PROPOSITIONS

We return to the game with dominoes discussed in Chapter 7. To avoid
pages full of little squares, we represent positions by graphs in which
nodes represent squares, and edges join nodes representing adjacent
squares. (Compare our conventions for COL and SNORT.) In this form, Left
move is to remove two nodes joined by a vertical edge, while Right
removes a pair of nodes joined by a horizontal edge.

Note that the game could be played on any graph in which two kinds of
edges are by definition called horizontal and vertical, but the addition
of new such graphs does not seem to make the game any more interesting.
Similar comments are often applicable to other games we shall discuss.

We attach at the end of the chapter a dictionary for dominoes like those
for COL and SNORT. To show how the dictionary was prepared, we discuss
in detail some of the results, and some particular positions. Most of
the results referring to general positions are due to Norton.

1.  A graph like (for instance) has the same value as the correspond Q
    ing graph G - (For the possible moves are in one-to-one cor
    respondence.)

2.  A position like O4@ has the same value as (G}- ). (For the

two moves for Vertical (Left) through the central node are equivalent.)

1.  If we delete a horizontal edge or introduce a new vertical edge, the
    value is unaltered or increased. (For these cannot harm Left or help

Right.)

1.  @-+ -\<H)\<(G}--) . (For the linking harms only Right.)

2.  If the starred edge in @\*- can be deleted without affecting the
    value of this position, tlen the same holds of the starred edge in
    (G)}+-\<H).

(This edge is called explosive.) (From the inequalities

@\~\<D\~D-@- \~\<D-)

Now we discuss some particular positions. The position \[ \[we have
already discussed in Chapter 7, where it appeared\] = 2 is dominant, and
Right has essentially only one move, to\] , \_,, so that we have =
2-\$=3+14 (The form 2 -4 is better in practice, 3 + 14 n theory ?) So
this position has

mean value 3. The two moves for Left (say) are equivalent in , so this

t position has value {-1 1} = 0. This result enables us to say that has

also the value 2 -4, and so the new edge in it is explosive.

We are now in a position to evaluate the 3 x 3 square . (We should

obviously describe sizes in terms of nodes here, since these correspond
to

squares in the original game.) In the position . the two moves for Left

are tof (0) and { (5), while that for Right is to + \] (2). So {=312
= 1. Now we have the equation

=+(} 4G) =a) -121-p = cou.

Now it is trivial that -2 \< G (add 2 to G and see how easy it is to
win), so the Left option 3 -2 is reversible through - 2, and so can be
replaced by the Left options (there aren any) of -2. In this way, we see
that G simplifies to +1, its simplest form.

It is not hard to show that the 3 x 4 rectangle {-3--\[ has value 14.
For this\]

and so the 4 x 4 square is a win for the first player. Similar arguments
can be found for the 4 x 6 rectangle, using the value of the position e
which does not take too long to compute. The 5 x 5 square can be shown
to be a second player win (and so have value 0) by the following special
strategy. This gives Left 6 moves, or keeps Right down to 5 moves and
gives Left 5 moves. Supposing Right first move is in the top left 3 x 3
square, make the moves a, b of the first drawing if we can, followed by
any c in the top three rows, and the moves d, e, f, If not, make the
move b of the later drawings and occupy the centre if possible, followed
by any move d other than e and f of the second drawing, then such of
those moves e and f which are still legal. If this is impossible, the
move c of the third drawing might be available, and lead back to a
similar strategy to our first attempt.

b if d c le b If

! c c j--\~4----\] L- ?Cc d a le b Ife a a 4 c 1 b f b STITT 1 Prod. e a
d al

Fic. 20. The equation 5 x 5 =0,

If not, the position is either as in the fourth drawing, with Right
third move in the top left 3 x 3 square. say, when we can make the moves
of that drawing, or Right has taken the centre. In the last case, we do
not really break any horizontal lines when we partition as indicated
into 4 regions of values 1,4, -4, - 4, and so we are at least half a
move ahead.

The zig-zag patterns , DL ,... give rise to an interesting

sequence of values. Letting ZZ, be the value of the n-square zig-zag
pattern, we find ZZ, = 0, ZZ, = 1, ZZ, = *, ZZ, =1, ZZ, = +1, ZZ, =2+,
ZZ,=+1*, ZZ,=2, ZZ, = +(2,2*), ZZ,,=1+, and ZZ,, = ZZ,*. The later
values get more complicated, but we can fairly easily calculate them
almost exactly.

Tn fact we find

ZZ ogni oy 8n+3 = O-ish ZZon+1 or 8n-3 = +!-ish ZZen42 = 1-ish ZZ gn-2 =
2-ish ZZ,, =(nn-1n- 2l\]n - 3...1 \[ffl\] O-ish

where the suffix ?ish ?means nfinitesimally shifted ? In other words, we
write G-ish for G + , when is infinitesimal. In these particular cases,
of course, the various infinitesimal shifts are small games.

The game ZZ,, has mean value 1 - (1/2"), is strictly less than 1, and
strictly greater than any negative number, but not greater than 0, These
results follow from the thermographs:

ZZ16 ZZ; 2 2}0 = ZZ, 1 = ZZ, 0 1 0 Fic. 21. The rectangle has a very
interesting value. Note first that we have o2 = 0, so the value is zero
or positive. The moves for Left are to es

and\_\_J, which equal (0) and (2 0) by some of our theorems. The moves

oe

for Right are to -9(0 -2) and #4 (} - 2). So we have the equality

Ty = {0,2 -2,5 -2} = G, say.

The option 4 - 2 is plainly dominated by 0 - 2, and since G \> 0, the
Left option 2 is reversible to 0, and can be replaced by the
(non-existent) 0 ? So we have G = 0 -2, which, since we see it is
strictly positive, is in simplest form.

For reasons that will only appear later, this game is called +,
(pronounced iny-two ?. For any positive number x, we have a similar game
iny-x ?

iny-x ?= 0/0\] -x = +

For each positive x, +, is a positive infinitesimal, and indeed a small
game in the sense of Chapter 9, since it is strictly smaller than all
positive numbers. But other calculations show that for strictly positive
x these games are smaller than all positive all small games, such as
f.Â As a matter of notation, we abbreviate sums involving such games in a
natural way-thus 5+, means 5 + +,, and 5 -, means 5 - +,.

It is possible to define powers {\* of f for positive x \> 1 so that
whenever x \> y, then {\* is infinitesimal compared to fT ? and all
these powers are all small. We have thus a rough-and-ready scale of
infinitesimals:

Firstly, infinitesimal numbers, like 1/c, 1/ , etc. Next, the all small
games, such as f, f, etc. Finally, the games like +,, +,, etc.

We say finally because indeed the games +-, really tend to zero as tends
to On, any strictly positive game being bigger than some +,. (Any short
positive game is greater than some +,.) But we should also add that,
zerothly, there are some infinitesimal games that are strictly greater
than all infinitesimal numbers! These remarks are very much amplified in
Chapter 16.

## A DOMINO DICTIONARY

We now tabulate values for all domino positions with at most 6 nodes
(Fig. 22). The game of dominoes has a behaviour in some ways
intermediate between the two games COL and SNORT of this chapter, with
typical values not so restricted as those of COL nor so chaotic as those
of SNORT. Many of these are derivable from each other by simple rules.
Often it obviously does not affect play if we make a configuration bend
in the opposite

direction to the given one-for instance = . There are also a number of
rules telling us that on certain occasions edges may be deleted without
affecting values, as described earlier in this chapter. Here is a brief
catalogue

of explosive edges: The ones indicated by lightning bolts in:

red og

of dt os fo i, y te

(1 node) (3 nodes) Pe\] b Ba 2 nedes) Lt) i. fois Ld - +1 +1 Is 1 1j\*
oo 2 1x . L 0 lis ye fe fh hop lls PERE ft beg

ul? \[: +1 S 4 1 HN i a +1 be \* 2 pels ft ag\] \]

aa

Some fairly large domino positions we have analysed are:

ee \> oe \> 4 7 +, -\$ +1 Ie(0 +14 2 2 2 I \[ +1 13 -1 1} 1 0

We have chosen these as being of shapes fairly likely to arise in actual
play.

Goran Andersson Domino game is called omineering ?in Winning Ways, where
larger dictionaries can be found. The necessary evaluations have been
greatly eased by David Wolfe ombinatorial games toolkit ?for partizan
game theory which runs on Linux computers. You can obtain it from

http://www. gustavus.edu/\~wolfe/papers-games/

or by sending e-mail to wolfe @ gustavus.edu.
