[4]{.lettrine}[W]{.smallcaps}orkers in a "quarry" cut "square" stones.
The word "squate" is derived from the Latin *ex quadrem*, which has also
given us "squadron," now often "squad," and which refers to troops drawn
up in a battle square. Of course, the Romans used *quadrem* because it
has four sides. "Quadrille" can be a "squadron," or a square dance for
four couples, or a game for four players with forty cards, or a pattern
of small squares.

In geometry, a "quadrilateral" is any four-sided figure, and you might
cali it a "quadrangle" if you counted its corners instead. Our college
"quads" are quadrangles, and the slang "quod" for "prison" is probably
the same word.

The "trapeze" artist takes his name from the Greek *quadrangle*, a
four-sided figure, or more literally, a little table Chaving four feet.
The root words here are of great antiquity and are closely related in
many languages. Thus the Hindi word *charpoy* for bed is much the same
as "trapeze," as are the scientific terms "quadruped" for a generic
four-legged animal and "tetrapod" for a division of butterflies. Of
course, butterflies belong to the class Hexapoda (six legs), but the
anterior pair of legs of Tetrapoda are unfit for walking.

The German *Karo* and French carreau for the diamond suit in cards
describe their four-sided shape, and *tessera* and *tesselia*, foursided
tile, has given us "tessellation."

In mathematics, "quadratic" equations are those that contain the
"square" (4 sides) of the variable. Unfortunately, these equations have
degree 2, so that in other. mathematical contexts "quadratic" has come
to mean 'of second degree,'' and this has entailed the use of
"biquadratic" (now more sensibly "quartic") for fourth-degree equations.
"Cater-cornered" is really "quater-cornered."

"Quarter" is a fourth part, e.g., a "quartern" (loaf); and a "quart" is
a quarter of a gallon; the English "firkin" and 'farthing' (fourthing)
are respectively a quarter of a barrel and a quarter of a penny. A
"quire" of paper was originally 4 sheets, though later 24.

[5]{.lettrine}[Y]{.smallcaps}our "fingers" are the five things that make
up your "fist," and "fives" is the name of a game played with the hand.
The early alchemists recognized four basic elements (earth, air, fire,
and water) from which ali ordinary things were made, but the
"quintessence" of ancient and medieval philosophy was the "fifth
essence" of which the heavenly bodies were made.

Masefield's "quinquereme of Nineveh" had five rows of oars, as opposed
to the "trireme." The word "quincunx" for the pattern $:\cdot :$ on a
die involves both five and one; in the Roman system for fractions it was
the symbol for five *uncia* (units, ounces, or twelfths).

A "pentagon" is named for its five corners, while a "pentagram" is drawn
in five parts. This has also been called a "pentacle," referring to its
five sharp points. "Punch" is a drink with five ingredients, from the
Hindi word, *punch*, for five, which also gives us "Punjab," the land of
the five rivers. The "Pentateuch" comprises the first five books of the
Bible.

[6]{.lettrine}[T]{.smallcaps}he "Sistine" Chapel was constructed by Pope
Sixtus IV (14146 84), whose papal style, "Sixtus," was taken from that
of Sixtus I (Pope ca. 116-125), who took the name to record that he was
the sixth successor to St. Peter.

A "sextain" is the last six lines of a sonnet, while a "sestina" is a
poem with six stanzas of six lines each; a Latin poem written in iambic
"hexameters" had lines that were six measures long.

The position of a ship at sea was traditionally found by a "sextant," a
navigational instrument in the shape of the sixth part of a circle. You
take your "siesta" at midday, the sixth hour of the old 12hour day.
University "semesters" are from Latin *semestris* (six months); and
Tennyson's lady,

*clothed in white samite, mystic, wonderful,*

was wearing a garment made from a six-threaded fabric (cf. "dimity").

[7--10]{.lettrine}[S]{.smallcaps}eptember, October, November, and
December take their names from the fact that they correspond to the
seventh, eighth, ninth, and tenth months of the old Roman year which
started in March. From 154 B.C. two new proconsuls were appointed each
January 1, and this was gradually adopted for the year's beginning. In
44 B.C., Quinctilis, the old fifth month, was renamed after Julius
Caesar, who had recently reformed the calendar and whose birthday was
July 3. Sextilis was renamed Augustus, for Augustus Caesar, previously
calied Octavius, in 8 B.C. The names Septimus (Septima) and Octavius
(Octavia) were customary for the seventh and eighth children in a
family.

The Sabbath is the seventh day. "Hebdomadal", (weekly) is derived from
"hebdomad," a variant of "heptad," from the Greek for a set of seven.
The French and Italian words *semaine* and *settimana* are also obvious
"seven" words (Latin *septimana*).

The first and last of eight consecutive white keys on a piano produce
notes whose frequencies differ by a factor of two. This interval is
called an "octave," although it consists of seven tones.

An "enneagon" is a nine-sided figure. "The Enneads" are the work of the
philosopher Plotinus in Porphyry's edition (he collected them into six
books of nine sections each).

The word "noon" has an interesting history. It comes from the Latin
*nona*. The "nones" were prayers originally said at the ninth hour (3
p.m.) of the old 12-hour day, but which gradually drifted to midday. A
"novena" is a devotional period of nine days. In the Roman calendar, the
"nones" of a month was the ninth day before the "ides" of that month.
The word "nonillion" was originally used for the ninth power of a
million, but later it became the tenth power of a thousand.

The "Decalogue" consists of ten commandments, while Boccaccio's
"Decameron" contains 100 tales that were supposed to be related in ten
days. A "dicker" was a bartering unit of ten hides: Since traders would
often argue down to the last "dime" (tenth of a dollar), it has come to
mean "haggle." A "tithe," of course, is a tax of one tenth part.

A religious or scholarly 'dean' takes his name from the Latin *decanus*,
a leader of ten, which has also given us "doyen," the most senior person
in a group. However, the apparently similar word "deacon" comes from the
Greek *diakonos*, a servant (literally "one who passes through, raising
the dust").

[11--20]{.lettrine}[T]{.smallcaps}he English word "eleven" is "one
left"? (over ten) and "twelve" is "two left." "Dozen" is a corruption of
the Latin *duodecim*. Your "duodenum" is so called because it is twelve
inches long.

Hotel floors are often numbered 1, 2,..., 12,14,15, ... . Hotel owners
obviously expect that some of their customers will suffer from
"triskaidekaphobia" (Greek for 3&10-fear, a morbid fear of the number
13).

The English words "thirteen" to "nineteen" derive from "three" to "nine"
with 'ten' in an obvious way, and there are analogs in most other
languages. In England a "fortnight" is used for "two weeks" (= 14
nights), while in France "quinzaine" refers to the same period (of 15
days). A "quatorzaine" is like a sonnet, having 14 lines.

Carl Friedrich Gauss (1777-1855) showed that the regular "heptadecagon"
(a 17-sided polygon) could be constructed with ruler and compasses.

"Score" is related to "share" and comes from the Old Norse "skor"
meaning a "notch" or "tally" on a stick used for counting. The total
count became the "score", still used in games and contests. Often people
counted in 20s; every 20th notch was larger, and so "score" also came to
mean 20. Carpenters still make score lines on wood they're about to saw,
but they may not realize that the biblical use of "three score and ten"
for man's allotted span of 70 years contains essentially the same word.
In the sense of "cut off," the word "score" is cognate with both "shirt"
and "skirt."

[21--99]{.lettrine}[T]{.smallcaps}he card game of "pontoon" was brought
home by English soldiers from World War I, where they had been speaking
"Paddykelly patois." Americans call it 'blackjack' --- of course,
"pontoon" is a corruption of the French *vingt-et-un*, 21.

"Quarantine" is an isolation period, originally of forty days (French
*quarante*). "Pentecost" comes from the Greek name for the Jewish
festival observed on the fiftieth day of Omer.

"Quadragesima" is the forty-day period of Lent, and "Quinquagesima" is
the fifty-day period from Quinquagesima Sunday to Easter Sunday. So
Quinquagesima Sunday is the seventh Sunday before Easter. "Sexagesima'
and "Septuagesima" name the two previous Sundays, apparently as the
result of a misunderstanding.

The "Septuagint" is the Greek version of the Old Testament, named after
the "seventy" scholars who were commissioned by Ptolemy Philadelphus
(284-247 B.C.) to translate it. (According to tradition, there were
actually 72 translators, and their work took 72 days.)

The English words "twenty" to "ninety" arise in the obvious way, but in
many languages there is a break in the system after "sixty." This has
sometimes been interpreted as the survival of an old number system in
which 60 was the base; compare the Babylonian system. Thus, in French,

  ---------------------------- -----------------------
  $70$ is *soixante-dix*                  ($60 + 10$),
  $80$ is *quatre-vingt*              ($4 \times 20$),
  $90$ is *quatre-vingi-dix*     ($4 \times 20 + 10$),
  ---------------------------- -----------------------

although the regular formations *septante*, *buitante*, *nonante* have
also been used.

English once treated these numbers in much the same way. Queen Elizabeth
would certainly have said "four score" (cf. *quatrevingt*) rather than
"eighty," and of course our biblical lifespan is "three score and ten."

There have also been special words for "sixty" that survived in
particular places. The English word "shock" for a collection of sixty
things is still used for sixty sheaves of corn (a variant is "shook")
and was once used for sixty pieces of haberdashery, or a German unit of
account consisting of 60 Groschen. It has also been used for collections
of other large sizes and might be the origin of the phrase "a shock of
hair."

[100\...]{.lettrine}[A]{.smallcaps} Roman "centurion" was in charge of
one hunred soldiers. "Centigrade" is the traditional name for the
thermometric system devised by Celsius, with one hundred degrees between
its two fixed points. A "cent" is a hundredth part of a dollar, a
"century" contains one hundred years and a "millennium" one thousand. A
"mile" consists of one thousand double paces (Latin *mille passus*).

Despite their names, "centipedes" have between 30 and 42 legs, while
only a few "millipedes" have as many as 200. One might expect the proper
scientific terms to be more cautious, but in fact the centipedes and
millipedes together form the group *Myriapoda* ("ten thousand legs").
The centipedes alone form the order *Chiliapoda*, meaning "lip-legged":
it is no more than a learned pun that this could also mean
"thousand-egged."

The Greek word bekaton has given us "hectare" for one hundred units of
area, "hecatomb" (Greek *bous, ox*) for the sacrifice of one hundred
oxen, and "thectograph" for a machine that will make hundreds of copies
of a drawing. The name of the Greek goddess Hecate is unrelated, but the
hundredth asteroid to be discovered (in 1868) was named "Hecate," both
after the goddess and as a pun on *bekaton*.

A British Member of Parliament cannot resign. Instead, the member
applies for the Stewardship of the Chiltern Hundreds, which
(theoretically) is an office of profit under the Crown, a
disqualification from membership. The word "hundred" here is part of a
county, usually supposed to consist of one hundred hides of land. This
word was also used in the British American colonies and still survives
in Delaware.

Etymologically, "hundred" is just an amplification of the Old English
word *bund*, and the root here is common to all the Indo-European
languages (Latin *centum*, Greek *bekaton*, Gothic *bund* from a
supposed Indo-European root, *kentom*). The last letters in "thousand"
have the same meaning: A "thousand" is literally a "strong hundred."

The numbers indicated by the various names have varied with the years.
Today "hundred" always refers to the "short hundred" of "five score,"
but originally it meant the "long" or "great" hundred of "six score" or
"two shocks" (120). In a similar way, a "hundredweight" has varied
between 100 and 120 pounds, before stabilizing at 112 pounds in England
or 100 pounds in the United States.
