# NUMBER WORDS

Throughout history, *number* and *numbers* have had a tremendous
influence on our culture and on our language. Thousands of words are
obviously associated with numbers, for example,

  ---------------- --------------------------------
  a monologue      is a speech by 1 person;
  a bicycle        has 2 wheels;
  a tripod         is a stool with 3 legs:
  a quadruped      is an animal with 4 legs;
  a pentathlon     consists of 5 athletic events;
  a sextet         is a piece for 6 musicians;
  a heptagon       is a 7-cornered figure;
  an octopus       has 8 \"feet\";
  a nonagenarian   has lived for 9 decades;
  and decimal      means counting in 10s;
                   
  ---------------- --------------------------------

but in many other cases the connections, once just as vivid, have been
obscured by the passage of time and changes in meaning.

Have you ever realized just how many words are associated with "number"
itself? This comes from an Indo-European root meaning "share" or
"portion\" and seems to have been originally associated with the
division of land. "Nimble\" refers to one who is quick to take his
share; your "nemesis" was originally your portion of Fate; and "numb\"
means "seized\" or "taken.\" A "nomad\" is one who wanders about in
search of pasture land. There are many technical "nom\" words:
"binomial" (two-numbered), "astronomy\" (numbering or allotting the
stars), "economy,\" "autonomy,\" and so on.

In German we still have the word *nebmen*, to take, with past participle
"nimm.\" English once had much the same verb, but by Shakespeare's day
the word "nim\" usually referred to illegal taking or pilfering. In
*Henry V* , Corporal Nym is a doubtful character that one might well
suspect of nimming. In our century "nim\" has become the name of a
take-away game.

Latin and Greek *nomisma* was a coin, and this has given us
"numismatics,\" the love of coins, and "nummulite,\" a coin-shaped
fossil. "Supernumerary\" now often means "redundant,\" but originally
superoumerary officials were those in addition to the number laid down
by the regulations.

# HICKORY, DICKORY, DOCK---EENY, MEENY, MINY, MO

There are several systems of words for numbers that survived for special
purposes in out-of-the-way places. The particular sequence of words
varies both with the part of the country and the purpose for which they
were used. One such system is

$$\begin{array}{l}
        \text{\emph{wan, twan, tetbera, methera, pimp,}}\\
        \text{\emph{sethera, lethbera, boverd, dovera, dick,}}\\
        \text{\emph{wanadick, twanadick, tetberadick, metheradick, pimpdick,}}\\
        \text{\emph{setheradick, letberadick, boveradick, doveradick, bumfit,}}\\
        \text{\emph{wanabumfit,...,}}\\
    \end{array}$$

Such rustic sequences appear in many countries. They are usually highly
corrupted versions of the standard number systems of ancient languages.

$$\begin{array}{l}
    \text{\emph{Hickory, dickory, dock.}}\\
    \text{\emph{The mouse ran up the clock.}}\\
    \text{\emph{The clock struck one;}}\\
    \text{\emph{The mouse ran down.}}\\
    \text{\emph{Hickory, dickory, dock.}}\\
\end{array}$$

Probably hickory,"dickory,\" and "dock\" are the words for "eight,\"
nine,\" and "ten\" in one of these systems (compare "hovera, dovera,
dick\"), while "eeny, meeny, miny, mo\" mean "one, two, three, four\" in
another.

Most languages have interesting features about their number words, which
repay study. We content ourselves with exhibiting those in Welsh. The
alternative forms are for masculine and feminine, while the
parenthetical forms are elisions in front of certain letters. There are
separate ways of saying $50$, $70$, and $90$.

  ---- ------------------------ ----- --------------------------------
  1    un                       16    un ar bymtheg
  2    dau, dwy                 17    dau, dwy ar bymtheg
  3    toi, tair                18    deunaw
  4    pedwar, pedair           19    pedwar, pedair ar bymtheg
  5    pump (pum)               20    ugain
  6    chwech (chwe)            30    deg ar hugain
  7    saith                    40    dugain
  8    wyth                     50    deg ar deugain; hanner cant
  9    naw                      60    trigain
  10   deg                      70    trigain a deg; deg ar thrigain
  11   un ar ddeg               80    pedwar ugain
  12   deuddeg                  90    pedwar ugain a deg; deg a
  13   toi, tair ar ddeg              phedwar ugain
  14   pedwar, pedair ar ddeg   100   cant
  15   pymtheg                        
                                      
  ---- ------------------------ ----- --------------------------------

Note that it is less duodecimal than many languages, which have separate
words for eleven and twelve. It thus lends itself easily to modern
decimalization. There are signs of bases 5 and 20, as well as 10.
Curiosities are $18 = 2 \times 9$ and $50 = \frac{1}{2}(100)$.
