# PHYLLOTAXIS

The botanical name for leaf arrangement is *phyllotaxis*. Look at the
florets in the sunflower's head in Figure 4.25. They appear to form two
systems of spirals, radiating from the center. Although it looks
symmetrical, the numbers of clockwise and counterclockwise spirals are
in fact not equal. If you count them carefully, you'll find $55$
clock-wise spirals and $34$ counterclockwise ones.

FIGURE 4.25 Sunflower. (Courtesy of D.R. Fowler and P. Prusinkiewicz.)

The pineapples in Figure 4.26 and the daisy in Figure 4.27 exhibit a
similar phenomenon. In Figure 4.28 which is a tracing of Figure 4.27, we
emphasize the $21$ such spirals going one way and $34$ going the other
way by numbering the petals. You can see such spirals on many other
plants, such as cauliflowers (Figure 4.29), pinecones and certain kinds
of cactus. There are usually two systems of florets, seeds, twigs,
petals, or whatever,[^1] going in opposite directions, and the numbers
of spirals in these systems are consecutive Fibonacci numbers. Why is
this so?

We'll describe what happens at an earlier stage in the plant's life. We
regard the tip of a plant as a cone and consider the initial arrival of
\"buds\" on this cone. The cone may be very flat, as in the sunflower
(Figure 4.30(a)), or pointed, as in the stem (Figure 4.30(b)), or
somewhere in between, as in the pineapple of Figure 4.30(c).

FIGURE 4.26 Spirals on pineapples, (Photo courtesy of D.R. Fowler and A.
Snider)

Figure 4.27 Daisy capitulum. (Computer generated by Deborab R. Fowler on
an IRIS workstation using an L-grammar algorithm.)

Figure 4.28 The florets of Figure 4.25 numbered to show arithmetic
progressions with Fibonacci differences $21$ and $34$.

These buds may become seeds in a seed case, twigs on a branch, petals of
a flower, and so forth. However, at this stage of its life, one bud
inhibits or repels others. This may be because they're crowded and
physically push each other apart, or maybe they are competing for
essential nutrients, or perhaps they are deliberately secreting some
inhibiting substance.

We regard the growth of our plant as taking place at the tip of the
cone. Since the tip is continually advancing by new growth, a given
portion of the plant moves steadily downward and outward relative to the
tip (Figure 4.31(a)).

Figure 4.29 The inflorescence of a cauliflower. (Photo courtesy of E.
Thirian)

1.  1.  

Figure 4.30 The \"cones\" of various plants.

1.  1.  1.  

FiGURE 4,31 Buds distributing themselves on a conical plant.

# SAY, BUD, WHERE DO YOU THINK You ARE GOING?

We'll number the buds $0, 1, 2,...$ , in order of their appearance. In
the plan view of Figure 4.31(b), we've put bud number $0$ at the $12$
o'clock position, and since it was born first, it has already arrived at
the perimeter. Buds $0$ and $1$ separate the cone into larger and
smaller sectors. Bud $2$ finds it easier to exist in the larger sector,
forcing $3$ into the smaller one, Whereabouts in these sectors will they
be? Since number $1$ is newer and nearer the tip than number $0$, it is
likely to be more inhibiting, so numbers $2$ and $4$ will be slightly
nearer to $0$ than they are to $1$. We've put them at about $9$ o'clock
and $2$ o'clock in Figures 4.31(b) and (c). At this stage we have four
sectors, the largest of which is between buds $1$ and $2$. We expect
number $4$ to be born in this sector, slightly nearer to $1$, since $2$
is more recent.

This process might seem rather rough, but it is in fact extremely
stable, Suppose, for instance, that bud number $1$ was born more or less
exactly opposite number $0$, leaving two equal sectors open for number
$2$. Number $2$ would randomly choose one of these, and, as it grew, it
would push away from $0$ and $1$ (but slightly more from $1$) and so
enlarge its own sector. Similar phenomena happen at later Stages in the
process. The reader should also understand that the action takes place
at a very early stage in the development, so that it is likely to be in
an otherwise uniform environment, maybe only a few millimeters across.

Figure 4.32 shows what happens when many buds have developed. This time
we've taken an idealized plant in which the cone is nearly cylindrical,
and we've unrolled the cylinder. Of course, a real plant won't have the
buds in exactly the \"right\" places, but neither can they be too far
off. The dotted ellipses in Figure 4.32 show how the spheres of
influence of buds $17, 20$, and $22$ leave a ready-made hole for bud
number $25$, It won't be born too far from the center of this hole, and
even if it's a little out of position, as it grows it will jostle itself
into the right position. Once the process is established, it's really
very hard for it to go wrong.

FIGURE 4,32 The first twenty-five buds.

In the perfect version of the process, each new bud advances by the same
angle, the angle being that which divides a complete turn in a golden
section. In our figures this is $0.618$ of a counterclockwise
revolution, or $0.382$ of a clockwise one.

How many spirals are there? These spirals are very much in the eye of
the beholder. You tend to link up neighboring buds into a chain. Thus,
in Figure 4.32, you probably mentally link the buds into lines with
difference $3$ that slope up to the right, and lines of difference $5$
that slant up to the left.

On the other hand, if you squint up the page from the bottom, you may
find it easier to organize them into lines of difference $8$, or even of
$13$. The successive Fibonacci numbers arise as those multiples of the
basic angle that are nearest to whole numbers of revolutions. The
particular Fibonacci numbers you notice depend on how squashed the
vertical scale is, compared with the horizontal. Figures 4.33 and 4.34
are just Figures 4.32 with the vertical axis more and more squashed, and
cut into domains by assigning each point to its nearest bud.

Although it looks very much like a plant, Figure 4.35 was actually
produced just by applying this ruie from a simple mathematical formula
that squashes the vertical axis by a gradually varying amount.

FIGURE 4.34 Here region $n$ touches $n \pm 5$, $n \pm 8$, and
$n \pm 13$.

FIGURE 4.34 Here $n$ touches $n \pm 8$, $n \pm 13$, and $n \pm 21$.

In Figure 4.32, the numbers $3, 5$, and $8$ are most obvious; in Figure
4.33, with the scale multiplied by a half, $5$ and $8$ are most
noticeable; in Figure 4.34, with scale only one-fifth, $8, 13,$ (and
$21$) are most obvious, At the foot of Figure 4.35, the numbers $3, 5$,
and $8$ are prominent; at the top, $13$ and $21$ begin to predominate.

Before you next eat a pineapple, try to find the correct numbering of
the buds on it. The pattern is usually easiest to follow about halfway
up, but with a little care you can work backward to the base and even
identify number $0$.

Figure 4.35 Variable growth rate accentuates different Fibonacci
numbers. (Diagram courtesy of Len Bos.)

The leaves on the stems of plants exhibit remnants of this process. The
embryo leaf buds in such cases were originally stacked quite tightly
around the stem, as in our figures. In a later phase of growth the stem
elongates so that all that is left of the original arrangement is a
tendency for each leaf to spiral about $0.382$ (or roughly $2/5$) of a
revolution from its predecessor.

The petals of a rose exhibit the same phenomenon in the way they overlap
their predecessors, but they are usually so tightly packed that the
structure is hard to see without dissecting it. Figure 4.36 shows a
flower on which we've numbered the petals individually.

FIGURE 4.36 The arrangement of the petals of a flower.

We may even speculate that the exact number (when it is small) of petals
on a flower might be determined by such a mechanism. The following table
shows in fractions of a revolution the angle defining the position of
petal number $n$ (this is just the fractional part of $27$) and also the
smallest angle between this petal and any of its predecessors. If the
latter were the only relevant parameter, it would estimate the
likelihood of the emergence of petal number $n$.

The position angles are just the fractional parts of successive
multiples

$$0,\; 1.618... ,\; 3.236... ,\; 4.854...$$

of the **golden number**

$$\tau = \frac{1+\sqrt{5}}{2} = 1.6180339887494... .$$

On this view you will see that the fifth petal (number $4$) finds things
just as easily ($0.146$) as its predecessor, while the sixth and later
ones have a substantially harder time ($0.090$). Without being able to
count, but merely by setting a given level of inhibition, a flower can
arrange for the total number of petals to be a small Fibonacci number,
but not any other number!

It is not so easy to control things in order to get a larger Fibonacci
number exactiy, since the influence of petal number $0$ becomes rapidly
less noticeable. In fact, when a flower has a large number of petals,
the exact number of petals usually depends on the particular specimen.

The reader should beware of trying to force this theory too far, because
plants use many other mechanisms in their development. Some emit pairs
of leaves simultaneously on opposite sides of the stem. Successive pairs
may then rotate by $0.191$ (half of $0.382$) of a revolution, but they
are just as likely to rotate by a right angle. Many flowers have exactly
six petals. For these it is usually the case that the petals are
organized as two generations of three petals each, This effect shows
very clearly on a narcissus; actually, the first three of its \"petals\"
are sepals rather than petals.

One occasionally sees sport pinecones in which the numbers of spirals
are the doubles of Fibonacci numbers. Presumably this happened because
buds $0$ and $1$ emerge almost simultaneously on opposite sides and the
subsequent process was bisected.

The next time you eat a head of cauliflower, notice that not only does
it have Fibonacci numbers of spirals of florets, but these in turn often
have spirals of subflorets. And on your walk through the forest, look
down the stem of a plant. If two leaves appear to be above one another
(Figure 4.37), they are probably a Fibonacci number apart.

FIGURE 4.37 Leaves round a stem.

The arrangement of the larger branches on a tree is often more random,
but there are some species of mountain trees in which the Fibonacci
organization can be seen throughout the entire structure, even in the
roots, if you dig down to them.

# REFERENCES {#references4}

V. 1. Arnold. Bernoulli-Euler updown numbers associated with function
sin- gularities, their combinatorics and arithmetics, Duke Math. J.
631991): 537-555.

V. 1. Arnold. Snake calculus and combinatorics of Bernoulli, Euler and
Springer numbers for Coxeter groups. Russian Math. Surveys 47(1992):
3-45.

E. R. Berlekamp, J. H. Conway, and R. K. Guy. Winning Ways for your
Mathematical Plays, Academic Press, 1982, 475-478, 501.

N. G. de Bruijn & B. J. M. Morselt. A note on plane trees. J. Combin.
Theory 2(1967): 27-34.

B. L. Burrows & R. F. Talbot. Sums of powers of integers. Amer. Math.
Monthly 9101984): 394-403.

J. H. Conway & H. S. M. Coxeter. Triangulated polygons and frieze
patterns. Math. Gaz. 57(1973): 87-94, 175-183; MR \$7 \# 1254-5.

A. W. F. Edwards. A quick route to sums of powers. Amer. Math. Monthly
93(1986): 451-455.

Antal E. Fekete. Apropos two notes on notation. Amer. Math. Monthly
101(1994): 771-778. FAMOUS FAMILIES OF NUMBERS 125

Martin Gardner. Time Travel and other Mathematical Bewilderments, W. H.
Freeman, New York, 1988, chapter 20, Catalan Numbers.

Johann Wolfgang von Goethe. Versuch die Metamorphosa der Planzen zu
erkidéren, Gotha, 1790.

H. W. Gould. Bell & Catalan Numbers: Research Bibliography of Two Spe-
cial Number Sequences, Sixth Edition, Morgantown, WV, 1985.

Ronald L. Graham, Donald E. Knuth & Oren Patashnik. Concrete Mathe-
matics, A Foundation for Computer Science, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA,
1989.

J. Karamata, Théorémes sur la sommabilité exponentielle et d'autres som-
mabilités s'y rattachant. Mathematica (cluj), 9(1935): 164-178.

A. A. Kirillow. Variations on the triangular theme in S. G. Gindikin &
E. B. Vinberg (editors). E. B, Dynkin Seminar on Lie Groups. Amer. Math.
Sec., 1995.

Donald E. Knuth. Two notes on notation. Amer. Math, Monthly 99(1992):
403-422.

D. E. Knuth & T. J. Buckholtz. Computation of tangent, Euler and
Bernoulli numbers. Math, Comput. 21(1967): 663-688.

Mark Krusemeyer. A parenthetical note (to a paper of Richard Guy). Math,
Mag. 69(1996).

Michael J. Kuchinski. Catalan Structures and Correspondences. M.Sc The-
sis, West Virginia University, 1977.

Luo JianJin. An Tu Ming, the first discoverer of the Catalan numbers.
Neimenggu Daxue Xuebo 19(1988): 239-245; MR 90e:01007.

J. Millar, N. J. A. Sloane & N. E. Young, A new operation on sequences:
The boustrophedon transform, 95-09-25 preprint.

Th, Motzkin. Relations between hypersurface cross-ratios, and a combina-
torial formula for partitions of a polygon, for permanent preponderance,
and for non-associative products. Bull, Amer. Math, Soc. 54(1948): 352-
360; MR 9: 489-490.

C. D. Oakley & R. J. Wisner. Flexagons. Amer. Math, Monthly 64(1957):
143-154; MR 19: 241b.

Przemyslaw Prusinkiewicz & Aristid Lindenmayer. The Algorithmic Beauty
of Plants, with James S. Hanan, F. David Fracchia, Deborah R. Fowler,
Martin J. M. de Boer & Lynn Mercer, Springer-Verlag, 1990.

H, Rademacher. On the partition function pGx. Prec. London Math. Soc.
(2), 43(1937): 241-254.

Ibrahim A. Salama & Lawrence L. Kupper. A geometric interpretation for
the Eulerian numbers. Amer. Math. Monthly 93(1986): 51-52.

J. O. Shallit, E2972. Another appearance of the Catalan numbers. Amer.
126 ThE Book OF NUMBERS

Math. Monthly 89(1982): 698; solution David M. Wells, 93(1986): 217-
218.

Yan Stewart, Mathematical Recreations: Daisy, Daisy, give me your
answer, do. Sci. Amer. 272#1Jan 1995): 96-99.

Peter Guthrie Tate. Proc, Royal Soc. Edinburgh VII(1870-71): 391-394.

D'Arcy Wentworth Thompson. On Growth and Form, Cambridge Univ. Press,
1952,

C. W, Wardlaw. Organization and Evolution in Plants, Longmans Green,
1965.

[^1]: "Everything is a leaf" --- Goethe.
