[1]{.lettrine}[N]{.smallcaps}ow we come to words associated with
particular numbers. When we say someone's "alone," we're really saying
he's "all one." The word "only" means "one-like," and mixing these ideas
we get "lonely," Originally you would "atone" for your misdeeds by
becoming "at one" with the person you'd affronted. When Mother Hubbard's
"poor dog had none," he had "not one." Once upon a time the word "once"
was used just for "one time"; a "nonce word" is a word used "for the
nonce," that is to say, just for this one time.

The "United States" are many states that have become one. A trade
"union" "unifies" its members into one body. Its members are "unanimous"
if they speak with one spirit. A principle is "universal" if it holds
throughout the "universe," the world turned into one object. Faculty and
students form a "university," again by being turned into one body;
students at a school wear a "uniform" if their clothing is of one form.
"Unicorns" are mythical beasts with one horn.

"Onion" comes from the same Latin word as "union." Some rustic Romans
referred to an onion as "one large pearl."

The Latin *uncia* was a unit that was $1/12$ of a larger unit, the as.
It has given us "inch" for $1/12$ of a foot, and "ounce," originally
$1/12$ of a pound. There are still 12 ounces to the pound in Troy
weight. The "uncial" letters of ancient manuscripts are large, inch-high
letters.

"Monopoly" still has its original Greek meaning of "selling by (only)
one person." A "monk" (Greek *monakos*) is one who is alone or solitary.
A "monolithic" monument is made from one (large) stone, and your
"monogram" is a way to write your name with one drawing, but perhaps we
should leave "one" before we get too "monotonous."

[2]{.lettrine}[T]{.smallcaps}he Old English word for this number had two
forms: the masculine, which has given us "twain," and the feminine, or
neuter, which gave us "two." Many English words that contain "tw" are
related to these. "Between," and "betwixt" refer to the position of an
object in relation to two others. "Twilight' is the "between light" that
separates night from day. "Twine" is formed by a "twist" of two strands
("twiced") into one. "Twill" is a two-threaded fabric, as is "dimity."
"Tweed" was a trade name that originated from an accidental misreading
of "tweel," the Scottish form of "twill." A "twig" results from one
branch splitting into two, and a "twin" from the splitting of one egg
into two. Samuel Langhorne Clemens took his *nom de plume* from the cry
"Mark twain" (two fathoms) that he must often have heard during his days
as a Mississippi river pilot.

"Didymium," a rare metal discovered in 1841, was so named because of its
twin-brotherhood with Lanthanum (the Greek for "twin" is *didymos*, a
word that mentions "two" twice). The name was specially apposite since,
in 1885, didymium was itself found to be a mixture of two elements,
Praseodymium (the "leek-green twin") and Neodymium ("new twin").

A concept exhibits "duality' when it has two aspects or has a "dual"
purpose; a 'duel' is fought by two persons, while a "duet" is played by
them. The word "double" has given us "doublet," originally a garment
with two layers, , "doubloon," originally double the value of a pistole,
and "doubt" and "dubious," being in two minds. "Double-tongued" and
'bilingual' have literally the same meaning, but their usage is quite
different! A "dilemma" is an argument that catches you on either of two
opposite assumptions.

A "biscuit" has been, "twice cooked," the "biceps" are a "twoheaded"
muscle, "binoculars" are intended for two eyes, and to "bifurcate" is to
split in two at a fork. The "bis", prefix, meaning "twice," derives from
the Latin *duis*, which has also given us *dis*, or *di*, which means
"split," "apart," or "away." Thus a "digression" is literally a "walking
away."

Since splitting is often acrimonious, "dis" words often carry a
pejorative, or even negative, sense. For instance, a "devil" (Greek
*dia-bolos*, throw, "between"--- itself a "two" word) sows "discord" by
separating two hearts. The variant "bis" is sometimes pejorative (it has
given us, "embezzlement") and sometimes not. Compare, "bisect," or "cut
into two (probably equal) parts," with "dissect," or "cut apart." Your
dictionary contains lots of "dis" words: "dismember," "dismantle,"
"disrupt," "distort," "disturb," "discredit," "discourage."

We "distrust" someone who is "duplicitous." The words "duplex,"
"duplicate," and "duplicity" all have the same etymology, "two-fold,"
although now a "duplicate" is just a copy, and a "duplicitous" person is
one who is two-faced.

A, "diploma" is a folded (literally "doubled") piece of paper entitling
you to certain privileges. A "diplomat" is one who carries a diploma,
entitling him to speak for his country's government.

Some of the most surprising words connected with, "two" come from the
Latin *diregere* (to lead or guide), which combines the "dis" prefix
with *regere* (to rule). "Dirigible," for a directable balloon, comes
"directly" from this word, as does "dirge," from the Catholic Office for
the Dead:

*Dirige, Domine, \..., viam meam.*

So, of course, does "direct" itself, also "director,"'directory,'' and
"directoire" (a style of furniture popular in the period of the
Directoire). Less obvious is French *dresser* (from late Latin
*directiare*, to direct), which has given us "dressage", (the direction
and adornment of horses), whence "dress," also, "address," and
"redress." "Adroit" and "maladroit" come from the French *droit*
("right," hence "righthanded," or dexterous), itself from the late Latin
*directus*. When you ask someone to "direct" you, you're really asking
which of *two* ways is *right*.

"To dine" originally meant "to breakfast" and so may be cognate with
French *dejeuner*, which comes from the late Latin *disjejunare*, to
break one's fast. The word *jejunare* has also given us "jejune"
(originally, "fasting," later "insipid," "unsatisfying").

"Deuced bad luck, sir!" The "deuce," or two-spot, is the lowest valued
card, and "snake's eyes" (a pair of ones) the lowest throw of a pair of
dice. These bad luck aspects take us back to the "devil" again, whereas
in tennis, "deuce" is the score when you need two points to win the
game, or two games to win the set.

We've just used the word "pair." This comes from the Latin *par*, which
is related to the Greek *para*, "beside." Of course, the commercial use,
"at par," is immediately derived from this. Akin is the Greek *porn√©*, a
harlot, from "pairing person," which has given us "pornography," writing
about harlots. Many mathematical and scientific words involve "par":
"parallel," "parabola," 'parity' (evenness or oddness, literally just
"evenness").

The prefixes "ambi" and "amphi" come from Latin *ambo* and Greek *ampbo*
(both, either, double). An "amphitheatre", is a double theatre, and an
"ambidextrous" person has "both right hands" --- he is equally dexterous
with each. The pejorative quality of two is again illustrated by
"ambivalent," which, less than a century ago, just meant "two-valued."

[3]{.lettrine}[T]{.smallcaps}he English county of Yorkshire is
traditionally divided into North, East, and West "Ridings"
("thirdings"), a word now used more generally for "constituencies." In a
similar way, the country near Rome was divided into the parts inhabited
by the Roman, Sabine, and Alban tribes. It has been suggested that
"tribe" (Latin *tribus*) mean,s "one third part of,." A "tribute" is a
tax "contributed" by a tribe. A "tributary" is "one who brings tribute':
the geographical sense dates only from 1836, and "distributary," in this
sense, from 1886.

A "tribune" was the head of a tribe before whom "tribunals" were held;
he might well "distribute" "retribution," having first heard
"testamentary" evidence, from *ter-stis*, to be a third party, standing
between accuser and accused. "Testimonial,"'contest,'' "protest,' and
"Protestant" are related words.

However, the 'tribulations' one might suffer from the deliberations of a
tribunal are *not* associated with the number "three," but rather with
rubbing and beating: compare "tribology," the study of friction, and
"tribadism."

A "triumphal" procession is one after the style of the old Bacchic
processions, accompanied by music played in triple-time. A "trump" card
is one that helps you to "triumph."

The "trivium" was where three ways meet: where folks met to discuss
"trivial" subjects. Later it was used for the three liberal arts:
grammar, rhetoric, logic. In the standard medieval curriculum, these
were considered, "trivial" compared to those in the "quadrivium":
arithmetic, music, geometry, and astronomy. At universities one studies
for "trimesters" or terms, and at Cambridge University one takes the
"tripos" examination: at one time the questions were asked by "the
bachelor of the tripos," who sat on a three-legged stool. He might well
have asked about the logical notion (*tertium non datur*) of the law of
the excluded middle, that there is no *tertizem quid* (*third
alternative to truth and falsehood*).

Neptune's "trident" has three teeth, a "trammel" was originally a
three-meshed net, "drill" is a three-threaded fabric (cf. "twill"),
geology has both "tertiary" and "triassic" strata, while "tierce" has
many meanings: (the office said at) the third hour of the canonical day;
an old wine measure equal to one-third of a pipe; the third of the eight
parries in sword-play, a run of three cards in piquet; the vertex of a
pointed arch; a heraldic charge of three triangles; or the musical
interval of a "third."
