# HOW NUMBERS ARE WRITTEN

There have been many different number names, notations, and symbols in
the world's history. We'll only describe a few that haye had significant
influence on Western civilization.

Perhaps the earliest recorded occurrences of numerals are on some
Sumerian clay tablets dating from the first half of the third millennium
B.C. The Sumerian system was later taken over by the Babylonians. The
surviving Babylonian documents are mostly from two periods: Old
Babylonian, from around the time of Hamurabi $\approx$ 1500 B.C. and the
Seleucid era, from 300 B.C.. The Babylonian cuneiform (Latin *cuneus*
wedge) script was formed by impressing wedge-shaped marks in clay
tablets. Their notation for numbers used the base 60, with individual
symbols, and \<, for 1 and 10; there is a famous exampie in Chapter 7.
Another is Plimpton 322, a remarkable table of "Pythagorean triples (see
Chapter 6). This system is very easy to read and is an early instance of
place notation. For instance, the symbols \< and \<\< mean $15$ and
$23$, while \<\<\< would read $(15 \times 60) + 23 = 923$,

It is because the ancients made astronomical calculations in base $60$
that we still use this system for measuring time, dividing an hour into
$60$ minutes, and a minute into $60$ seconds. In its path through the
heavens, the sun takes roughly $360$ days (actually $365.242199$) to
describe a complete circle, so it seems that the Babylonians divided a
complete circle into $360$ degrees (Â°). In the Babylonian manner, each
degree is divided into $60$ minutes ('), each minute into 60 seconds
("), each second into 60 thirds ("'), and so on.

Again, it is because mathematical and astronomical tables written in
this notation were so hard to recompute that a modern astronomer writes
an angle $25^\circ 32'14''$ just as his Babylonian forebears wrote

$$<<|||<<<||<|||$$

and similarly, that you say that the time is $9:45$ ($9$ hours, $45$
minutes) rather than $9.75$ hours, We see that the Babylonians used
place value, the symbol! meaning $1$ or $60$ or $60^{2}$ or... ,
according to its position. This could be confusing, because they had no
zero. Occasionally they left a space, and later the Seleucids introduced
the symbol! ? . Unfortunately, place value was not used in the clumsier
Greek and Roman systems and only reappeared in our Own system, using the
Hindu-Arabic notation. The Egyptians used a different system, which
we'll discuss when we describe the Roman system, to which it is very
similar.

## THE GREEK SYSTEM

The Greeks, from about the fifth century B.C., used the notation
illustrated in Figure 1.1.

Since their alphabet had only 24 letters and 27 were needed, they
resurrected three letters of Semitic origin, namely digamma (F) or vau
($\varsigma$), goph or koppa ($varrho$, ?) and san or sampi (?) to
represent 6, 90, and 900. There were various systems for numbers larger
than a myriad (10,000). Diophantus, around the third century A.D., used
a dot to indicate that the preceding numbers should be multiplied by
10,000. He gave the following example.

$$\begin{array}{cccc c cccc}
    .\alpha & \tau & \lambda & \alpha & . & ,\epsilon & \sigma & \iota  & \delta \\ 
    1 & 3 & 3 & 1 &   & 5 & 2 & 1 & 4\\
\end{array}$$

$$\begin{array}{ccc ccc ccc}
        \alpha & \beta & \gamma & \delta & \epsilon & F & \zeta & \eta & \theta \\
        1 & 2 & 3 & 4 & 5 & 6 & 7 & 8 & 9 \\
        \iota & \kappa & \lambda & \mu & \nu & \xi & o & \pi & \varrho \\
        10 & 20 & 30 & 40 & 50 & 60 & 70 & 80 & 90 \\
        \rho & \sigma & \tau & \upsilon & \varphi & \chi & \psi & \omega & ?\\
        100 & 200 & 300 & 400 & 500 & 600 & 700 & 800 & 900 \\
        ,\alpha & ,\beta & ,\gamma & ,\delta & ,\epsilon & F & ,\zeta & ,\eta & ,\theta \\
        1000 & 2000 & 3000 & 4000 & 5000 & 6000 & 7000 & 8000 & 9000 \\
    \end{array}$$

FIRGURE 1.1 The Greek number system.

## THE ROMAN SYSTEM

The fact that we are still familiar with the Roman numerals (sometimes
used on clock faces, monuments, and some documents) is because they were
the only ones in use in Europe for well over a thousand years. The Roman
number system was based on a similar one used by the Etruscans, the
letters I, V, X, L, C, D, M being based on the Etruscan originals. The
Romans assimilated the earlier C and ? for $100$ and $1,000$ to the
Latin letters C and M, which happened to be the initial letters of
*centum* and *mille*. Half of ? was simplified to ? or D for $500$. The
symbols

$$\text{for } 5000 \; 10000 \; 50000 \; 100000$$

are fortunately no longer used, although twenty-two of the original 32
copies of ? can still be seen on the *Columna Rostrata*, describing the
capture of $3,200,000$ prisoners.

The symbol $\infty$, also a corruption of ?, was occasionally used as an
alternative for 1,000. In 1655 John Wallis (1616-1703) proposed that
this symbol be used for "infinity," and mathematicians have used it ever
since.

The subtractive principle, whereby 9 and 40 are written as IX and XL,
only became popular in medieval times. It was hardly used by the Romans.
Roman fractions were based on twelfths ("uncia" from "unus," i.e., one
of the lesser units); we discuss them later.

## THE EGYPTIAN SYSTEM

The Egyptians had earlier used a similar system to the Roman one, but
with fewer symbols: Figure 1.2 compares the two systems.

The Romans would have had to write

?

for a million. The Egyptians had a much nicer symbol: a man with his
arms uplifted:

?

FIGURE 1.2 The Egyptian and Roman number systems.

## HINDU-ARABIC NUMERALS

The numeration we use now, in which numbers are formed by juxtaposing
the ten digits $0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9$ is often referred to as
Arabic notation. In fact it is of Hindu origin and was transmitted to
Europe, like a lot of the world's knowledge, by Arab scholars.

The value of a digit depends on its position in the system (its place
value) so that one needs a symbol for zero, to distinguish $904$ from
$94$, for example. It was in this way that the concept of zero forced
itself onto the Indian mathematicians. Theoretically, zero is also
needed occasionally in the Babylonian system, but as the base is so much
larger, the context would usually supply the missing information, and,
as we've seen, the Babylonians struggled on without it for over a
thousand years.

The system is so familiar to us that we regard it as giving the names
for numbers, as being what a number really is! When a date is given in
Roman numerais, for example, most of us painfully translate it into the
Arabic system. Originally it was the other way around! In medieval times
the merchants of Europe were thoroughly familiar with the Roman system
and found the new Arabic system very confusing, and early examples often
contain mistakes or mix the two systems.

$$\text{M50iv} = 1504$$

Lowercase numerals were also introduced in medieval times, and it was
not uncommon to see $\text{mcdxxvi} = 1426$. Nowadays, this system of
lowercase numerals only survives in special places such as subsections
of a list or in numbering the preliminary pages of a book.

## NUMBERS IN OTHER BASES

Of course, a similar system of notation can be defined using any whole
number, $N$, as a base. In the base $N$ system, "$abcd$" means

$$aN^3 + bN^2 + cN + d,$$

and the "digits" $a, b, c, d$ customarily range from $0$ to $N-1$.

Our Hindu-Arabic system is also called *decimal* (base $10$); the
Babylonian system was *sexagesimal* (base $60$); and most computers
internally use the *binary* system (base $2$). The *octal* (base $8$)
and *hexadecimal* (base $16$) systems are easily convertible to the
binary system and so are often used by computer programmers. Numbers
written in base $2$ are often called "binary numbers." Of course, binary
numbers are not a new kind of number, they're just the old numbers under
a different name:

$$\begin{array}{c}
        1, 10 = 2, 11 = 3, 100 = 4, 101 = 5,\\
        110 = 6, 111 = 7, 1000 = 8\ldots{}\\
    \end{array}$$

# KINDS OF NUMBERS

We've organized this book around different kinds of numbers: the
following brief survey introduces them.

The familiar **whole numbers**, $1, 2, 3,\dots$ (Chapter 2) have a
history that starts even before our own. Certain species of bird can
detect that one of the eggs in their nest has been removed. Presumably
they have some primitive idea of how many eggs there should be. An
experiment described by Tobias Dantzig shows that crows could recognize
when up to four men with guns had come and gone. The birds kept a safe
distance in the meantime but could be fooled if as many as five came and
only four went.

However, many primitive human languages only have names for numbers of
particular objects, and not for the dea of numbers. The Fiji Islanders
use "bolo" for ten boats, but "koro" for ten coconuts and "salora" for
one thousand coconuts. The divorce between the abstract concept of
number and the objects being counted took a long time, and evidence is
still visible; a couple (of people), a brace (of pheasants), a century
(of years, or runs at cricket).

Figure 1.3 Roman fractions,

Special families of numbers are discussed in Chapters 3 and 4. A
particularly interesting family is the prime numbers, whose intriguing
properties demand a chapter of their own, Chapter 5.

**Fractions**, or **rational numbers** (Chapter 6), are surely 2 human
discovery, whose origins are lost in antiquity. However, most of the
early systems named only a few obvious common fractions.

The Rhind papyrus, dated from 1650 B.C., had simple names only for the
unit fractions,
$\frac{1}{2}, \frac{1}{3}, \frac{1}{4}, \frac{1}{5}, \dots$, and for
$\frac{2}{3}$ (?). Other fractions, when required, were made by adding
these, e.g.$\frac{4}{5}=\frac{1}{2}+\frac{1}{5}+\frac{1}{10}$ or
$\frac{3}{4} = \frac{1}{2}+\frac{1}{4}$, although some early papyri have
? for $\frac{3}{4}$.

The Roman notation for fractions is not generally very well known. Their
unit was customarily divided into twelve smaller units, and they had
names and symbols for all the multiples of these (Figure 1.3).

The fact that there are **irrational numbers**, that are not fractions,
came as a great surprise to the Greeks and is still probably unfamiliar
to most of the world's inhabitants. Traditionally, this discovery is
credited to Pythagoras, who found that the diagonal of a square is not a
rational multiple of its side; that is, the ratio of diagonal to side
cannot be expressed by whole numbers. The Pythagorean brotherhood is
supposed to have sacrificed a hecatomb, or a hundred oxen, in honor of
this stupendous discovery. The irrational number involved is one of the
**algebraic numbers** treated in Chapter 7.

We've already seen how the problems of notation brought the new number
**zero**, 0, to the attention of mathematicians. It was the introduction
of algebra (solve $2x + 7 = 3$) that forced us to recognize **negative
numbers**. Initially, negative numbers were regarded as very mysterious
things, although the advances of science and technology have made them
very familiar to us.

Algebra also led to the introduction of **complex numbers**, which are
even more puzzling. We remove some of the mystery in Chapter 8.

On the other hand, algebraic equations do not suffice to define all the
numbers of interest to us, and we are forced to recognize
**transcendental numbers**, whose existence was first shown by Liouville
in 1840. It had long been suspected that the notorious number $\pi$ was
transcendental, although this was only finally established. by Ferdinand
Lindemann in 1882. We'll read about $\pi$ and other transcendental
numbers in Chapter 9.

Children sometimes ask "How many numbers are there?" A coherent theory
of **infinite numbers** was first developed by Georg Cantor from 1872 to
1884. The number of whole numbers is Cantor's Xo, a8 is the number of
algebraic numbers, while the number of transcendental numbers is 2\*Â°.
In fact, Cantor introduced two distinct systems of infinite numbers,
**cardinal numbers** and **ordinal numbers**, and we explain them in
Chapter 10. These are generalizations of the ordinary whole numbers,
$0, 1, 2, 3, ...$ . The appropriate generalization for fractional
numbers and other real numbers was discovered only recently, by one of
us. The resulting **surreal numbers** are also described in Chapter 10.

# SOME SPECIAL FRIENDS

As we explore the different kinds of numbers, we can't help becoming
familiar with interesting individual numbers and families of numbers. On
the way we hope that you'll make friends with many particular numbers.

**Two** is celebrated as the only even prime, which in some sense makes
it the oddest prime of all. We'll show you how to construct a regular
seventeen-sided polygon with ruler and compass, and we'll tell you
what's special about **one hundred and sixty-three**.

In addition to **Pythagoras's number** $\sqrt{2}$ and Ludolph's number
$\pi$, geometry has given us the **golden number** $\tau$, while
analysis produces **Napier's number** $e$ and the **Euler-Mascheroni**
number $\gamma$. Special numbers like these continue to appear as our
knowledge expands; two new ones are **Feigenbaum's numbers** $F_1$ and
$F_2$ (see Chapter 7). Some of our favorite numbers are displayed in
Figure 1.4.

The last two items were taken from Simon Plouffe's Table of Constants,
under construction in connexion with the Inverse Symbolic Calculator
mentioned below. What are your favorite numbers? What do you do if you
come across a number and don't know what it is?

We quote from the Preface of the Borweins' book:

How do we decide that such a number is actually a special value of a
familiar function without the tools Gauss had at his disposal, which
were, presumably, phenomenal insight and a prodigious memory?

Jonathan Borwein & Peter Borwein

The Borweins are currently building an online, internet-based, number
checker. It is like a spell checker. You put your number in and it
confirms hits. They call it the 'Inverse Symbolic Calculator' and it can
be accessed at http://www.cecm.sfu.ca/projects/ISC.html

# REFERENCES {#references_1}

Asger Aaboe. Episodes from the Early History of Mathematics, New Math.
Library 13, Math. Assoc. of America, 1964.

J. Borwein & P. Borwein. A Dictionary of Real Numbers, Wadsworth, 1990.

Lucas N. H. Bunt, Phillip . Jones, and Jack D. Bedient. The Historical
Roots of Elementary Mathematics. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ,
1976.

A. B, Chace, and others. The Rbind Mathematical Papyrus. Math. Assoc. of
America, Oberlin, OH, 1927-1929.

John H. Conway, On Numbers and Games, Academic Press, Londen, 1976.

Tobias Dantzig. Number, the Language of Science, Doubleday Anchor, 1956.

H.-D. Ebbinghaus, H. Hermes, F. Hirzebruch, M. Koecher, K. Mainzer, J.
Neukirch, A. Preste & R, Remmert. Numbers, Springer-Verlag, Graduate
Texts in Mathematics, 123, 1991.

Richard J. Gillings. Mathematics in the Time of the Pharaobs. M.1.T.
Press, Cambridge, MA, 1972.

Donald E. Knuth, Surreal Numbers, Addison-Wesley, Reading MA, 1974.

Karl Menninger. Number Words and Number Symbols. A Cultural History of
Numbers, trans. Paul Broneer from rev. German ed., M.1.T. Press,
Cambridge, MA, 1969, 1977.

Otto Neugebauer. The Exact Sciences in Antiquity, Brown Univ. Press,
1957; reprinted Dover, 1969.

Eric Partridge. Origins, A Short Etymological Dictionary of Modern
English.

Rudy Rucker. Mindtools, Houghton Mifflin Company, Boston, 1987.

David Eugene Smith & Jekuthiel Ginsberg. Numbers and Numerals, and see
James R. Newman, The World of Matbematics, George Allen & Unwin, London,
1960, pp.Â 442-464.
