Historically, complex numbers first arose from the solution of quadratic
equations. You can solve the equation

$$x^2-x-6 =0$$

either by factoring it as $(x-3)(x+2) = 0$, or by using the well-known
formula, or by writing it as

$$\biggl(x-\frac{1}{2}\biggr)^2
    =6\frac{1}{4}=
    \biggl(2\frac{1}{2}\biggr)^2$$

and you get the answers $\frac{1}{2}\pm2\frac{1}{2}$, namely, $3$ or
$-2$; sensible answers and there's no problem.

But for the equation

$$x^2-2x+2 = 0,$$ we arrive at $$(x-1)^2= -1,$$

and since the squares of real numbers are positive (or possibly zero),
it looks as though there aren't any roots. But if we allow ourselves to
invent a number called "the square root of minus one," then we could get

$$\begin{aligned}
        x-1&= \pm \sqrt{-1}.\\
        x&=1+\sqrt{-1}\text{ or }1-\sqrt{-1}.\\
    \end{aligned}$$

Why do these seem nonsensical?

# IMAGINARY NUMBERS ARE REAL! COMPLEX NUMBERS ARE SIMPLE!

The early investigators were very puzzled about the dubious nature of
these new numbers, and all sorts of insults were hurled at them. In
spite of this, some brave souls just followed the formulas wherever they
ed and seemed not to make mistakes.

Although Gauss, Argand, and Wessel cleared the matter up nearly 200
years ago, the mystery persists in some people's minds even today.
Indeed, we still call the square roots of negative numbers "imaginary,"
although, as we'll show you soon, they're just as "real" as real
numbers. They turn out to be invaluable in many applications of
mathematics to engineering, physics, and almost every other science.
Moreover, these numbers obey all the rules which you already know for
"real" numbers.

We pause to point out that the so-called real numbers are not as real as
you might think and do not have much relevance ta physical reality, Does
$\sqrt{2}$ correspond to anything in the physical world? The definition
as the ratio of the diagonal of a square to its side is part of
theoretical Euclidean geometry and supposes an infinite precision of
measurement that is physically impossible.

The geometry that the physicists have used since Einstein is not
Euclidean, and the diagonal of a large enough square might differ
appreciably from $\sqrt{2}$ times its side. Even if the large-scale
geometry of physics were Euclidean, after the quantum theory it becomes
unlikely that at the atomic level it would be Euclidean, or even
meaningful. It has been questioned whether space can be divided any more
finely than the Planck length of $1.05457266 \times 10^{-34}$ or time
below the Planck time of $10^{-43}$ seconds.

No! The square root of two, like other infinite precision real numbers
such as $e$ and $\pi$, is not really real in the physical sense! They
are all figments of the mathematician's mind: concepts of abstract
mathematics that only approximately correspond to things in the real
world.

In fact, astonished reactions have greeted the introduction of each new
kind of number.

When negative numbers were introduced, they were deemed impossible. What
does it mean to speak of $-3$ apples? Of course $-3$ is not a "real"
number! But *now* it seems quite sensible to speak of negative
temperatures and negative bank balances.

Consternation also reigned when Pythagoras first discovered
incommensurable numbers. The word "irrational" is ertymologically the
same as "unreasonable," while "surd" is similarly related to "absurd."

No doubt when fractions were first introduced, people wondered what was
meant by $4/5$ of a person, and we still find it amusing when we're told
that the average family contains $2.3$ children (Figure 8.1).

Even the whole numbers themselves are artificial constructs: a brace of
pheasants is real enough, but the number $2$ is a theoretical
abstraction. We saw in Chapter 1 that some primitive languages have no
names for abstract numbers.

FIGURE 8.1 The average family.

# REALIZING COMPLEX NUMBERS

What a real number really is, is a distance together with a direction
given by its sign, as measured in terms of some given unit,

Thus, in Figure 8.2, the number $x$ is the ratio $OX/OU$, measured with
respect to a fixed length $OU$, and $x$ would be negative if $X$ were to
the left of $O$.

FIGURE 8.2 What a real number really is.

For real numbers, the only directions are left and right along a fixed
line. In the same spirit we can define complex numbers as distances
along arbitrary directions in a fixed plane. A **complex number** is a
point of the plane in which there is a distinguished directed line
segment $OU$, of length one unit. In particular, we define
$i = \sqrt{-1}$to be the point $I$, $1$ unit from $O$ in a direction
$90^\circ$ from $OU$ (Figure 8.3). $O, U$, and $I$ are called $0, 1$,
and $i$.

For the new numbers we could define addition and multiplication however
we like, but we'll do it so that they fit with the rules we already know
for real numbers, where adding $2$ corresponds to sliding $2$ units to
the right on the real number line, and multiplying by $3$ means
expanding the scale by $3$, keeping $O$ fixed.

FIGURE 8.3 What a complex number really is.
