In this chapter we'll meet some numbers that transcend the bounds of
algebra. The most famous ones are Ludolph's number $\pi$, Napier's
number $e$, Liouville's number $l$, and various logarithms.

# THE NUMBER $\pi$

Also he made a molten sea of ten cubits from brim to brim, round in
compass, and five cubits the height thereof; and a line of thirty cubits
did compass it round about.

2 Chronicles, iv, 2

The area of a circle of radius $1$ is roughly

$$3.1415926535 ....$$

The perimeter of a circle of diameter $1$ is the same number. Just what
is this number? The above quotation suggests that its author thought
that $\pi$ was $3$, although better approximations were known to the
Babylonians ($3\frac{1}{8}$) and Egyptians ($2^8/3^4 \approx 3.1605$ in
the Rhind papyrus, \<1650 B.C.).

My dear friend, that must be a delusion, what can a circle have to do
with the number of people alive at a given time?

An actuary, quoted by Augustus de Morgan.

The mathematical history of $\pi$ really begins with Archimedes. He
proved that the above two definitions do give exactly the same answer,
and he also showed that it's the same number that occurs in the slightly
more complicated formulas

$$4\pi r^2 \text{ and } \frac{4}{3}\pi r^3$$

for the surface area and volume of a sphere, respectively. He also
proved that $\pi$ is strictly less than $3\frac{1}{7}$, but strictly
greater than $3\frac{10}{17}$. He did this by computing the areas of a
regular polygon of $96$ sides, and his ingenious computation makes use
of clever approximations for square roots.

# FORMULAS FOR $\pi$

Much of the history of $\pi$ consists of assertions that its value was
approximately or exactly equal to some number. For instance, the great
Indian mathematician Brahmagupta gave the value $\sqrt{10} = 3.162...$
in about 600 a.p., even though the Chinese astronomer Tsu Ch'ung-chih
(born 430 a.p.) had already asserted that a lay between $3.1415926$ and
$3.1415927$, although, inconsistently, he gave $355/113$, which he
called the "accurate" value.

In 1593 Vieta exhibited a formula for $\pi$,

$$\frac{2}{\pi}=
    \sqrt{\frac{1}{2}}\times
    \sqrt{\frac{1}{2}+\frac{1}{2}\sqrt{\frac{1}{2}}}\times
    \sqrt{\frac{1}{2}+\frac{1}{2}\sqrt{\frac{1}{2}+\frac{1}{2}\sqrt{\frac{1}{2}}}}\times\cdots.$$

He found this by using Archimedes's idea, but with polygons with
$4, 8, 16,... , 2^n$ sides in a circle of radius $1$ (Figure 9.1).

Ludolph van Ceulen spent a large part of his life computing a by similar
means, and in Germany $\pi$ is still sometimes called **Ludolph's
number**.

FIGURE 9.1 Successive approximations to $1$.

He directed that it be inscribed on his gravestone, which is now
unfortunately lost. In 1596 he computed $\pi$ to $20$ decimal places and
by the time of his death he had computed $\pi$ to $35$ decimal places:

$$3.14159 26535 89793 23846 26433 83279 50288....$$

Soon after Ludoiph's death, many new formulas for $\pi$ were discovered
in great profusion, some of which can be used to compute $\pi$ with
great rapidity.

# WHAT'S THE NATURE OF $\pi$?

It is possible today to calculate $\pi$ to millions of decimal places,
and it's natural to ask what kind of number it is. You know that it's
very close to $\frac{22}{7}$, but not exactly equal. It's even closer to
$\frac{355}{113} = 3.1415929203...$ , a value discovered by the father
of Adrian Metius in 1585, but even that number is not exact. Is it
possible that a is exactiy equal to some fraction? The answer is "no,"
as was shown by the great German mathematician Lambert in 1761. Lambert
also showed that $\pi$ wasn't even the square roct of a fraction.

In fact, many mathematicians must haye suspected that $\pi$ was not the
root of any algebraic equation with whole number coefficients, that is,
that $\pi$ is a **transcendental number**. The eventual proof of this by
Lindemann in 1882 is one of the milestones of mathematics.
