# Preface  {#preface .unnumbered}

The Book of Numbers seems an obvious choice for our title, since its
undoubted success can be followed by *Deuteronomy, Joshua,* and so on;
indeed the only risk is that there may be a demand for the earlier books
in the series. More seriously, our aim is to bring to the inquisitive
reader without particular mathematical background an explanation of the
multitudinous ways in which the word "number" is used, We have done this
in a way which is free from the formality of textbooks and syllabuses,
so that the professional mathematician can also glean important
information in areas outside her own speciality, and correspondingly
enrich her teaching.

The uses of the word number are diverse, but we can identify at least
three separate strands. The development of number (usually written in
the singular), continually adapting and generalizing itself to meet the
needs of both mathematics and its increasing variety of applications:
the counting numbers, zero, fractions, negative numbers, quadratic
surds, algebraic numbers, transcendental numbers, infinitesimal and
transfinite numbers, surreal numbers, complex numbers, quaternions,
octonions,

Then there is the special study of the integers, Gauss's higher
arithmetic, or the theory of numbers (usually written in the plural),
which overlaps the more recent area of enumerative combinatorics.
Special sets or sequences of numbers: the prime numbers, Mersenne and
Fermat numbers, perfect numbers, Fibonacci and Catalan numbers, Euler
and Eulerian numbers, Bernoulli numbers.

Finally there is a host of special numbers: Ludolph's $\pi$, Napier's
$\epsilon$, Euler's $\gamma$, Feigenbaum's constant, algebraic numbers
which arise in specific contexts ranging from the diagonal of a square
or of a regular pentagon to the example of degree 71 which arises from
the apparently simple \"look and say\" sequences.

Although mathematics is traditionally arranged in logical sequences,
that is not the way the human brain seems to work, While it is often
useful to know parts of earlier chapters in the book when reading some
of the later ones, the reader can browse at will, picking up nuggets of
information, with no obligation to read steadily from cover to cover.

Chapter 1 describes number words and symbols and Chapter 2 shows how
many elementary but important facts can be discovered "without using any
mathematics.\" Chapters 3 and 4 exhibit several sets of whole numbers
which can manifest themselves in quite different contexts, while Chapter
5 is devoted to the "multiplicative building blocks,\" the prime
numbers. Fractions, or "algebraic numbers of degree one,\" are dealt
with in Chapter 6 and those of higher degree in Chapter 7. So-called
"complex\" and "transcendental\" numbers are explained in Chapters 8 and
9. The final chapter is devoted to the infinite and the infinitesimal,
to surreal numbers which constitute an extremely large, yet infinitely
small, subclass of the most recent development of number, the values of
combinatorial games.

The color graphics in Chapter 2 are the work of Kenny and Andy Guy,
using Brian Wyvill's Graphicsland software at the Graphics Laboratory in
the Computer Science Department at The University of Calgary. Three of
the figures in Chapter 4 are reproduced from Przemyslaw Prusinkiewicz
and Aristid Lindenmayer, The Algorithmic Beauty of Plants,
Springer-Verlag, New York 1990, by kind permission of the authors and
publishers. The first figure is due to D.R. Fowler, the second to D.R.F.
and P. Prusinkiewicz and the third to D.R.F. and A. Snider.

We thank Andrew Odlyzko and Peter Renz for reading a much earlier draft
of the book, and for making many useful suggestions. We are also
grateful for the polite and patient persistence of Jerry Lyons, Lies
Gibson and Henry Krell, and for the general competence of the Springer
staff. We are proud to be among the early contributors to what is yet
another successful Springer series.
