## 
http://people.whitman.edu/~hundledr/courses/M467/MultiNewton.pdf


```matlab
function [y dy]=myfunction(x)
%Example function to try out Newton’s Method
%
n=length(x);
y=zeros(size(x)); %Not necessary for a small vector
dy=zeros(n,n); %Not necessary for a small matrix
y(1)=-x(1)^3+x(2);
y(2)=x(1)^2+x(2)^2-1;
dy(1,1)=-3*x(1)^2; dy(1,2)=1;
dy(2,1)=2*x(1); dy(2,2)=2*x(2);
end
```

Next, we write a little Newton’s Method function:

```matlab
function x=multinewton(f,x,NumIters)
%Performs multidimensional Newton’s method for the function defined in f
%starting with x and running NumIters times.
[y,dy]=f(x);
for j=1:NumIters
	s=dy\y;
	x=x-s;
	[y,dy]=f(x);
end
end
```

And here is the output, using a couple of iterations (compare with step 8 of the table on
page 134):
```matlab
>> format long
>> x=[1;2];
>> y=multinewton(@myfunction,x,7);
>> y’
ans =
0.826031357654187 0.563624162161259
```


## 不太好的方法？ 不易理解

Newton's Method in n Dimensions
-------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 1.  **Problem**: 

Find n-Dimensional Zero of a Vector-Valued Function of     a Vector Argument **f**(**x**),
$$
\mathbf{f(z)=0}
$$
where  $\mathbf{x}=[x_{i}]_{n\times 1}$, $\mathbf{z}=[z_{i}]_{n\times 1}$and
$\mathbf{f(x)} = f_{i}(\mathbf{x})_{n\times 1}$ (Vectors are indicated by
boldfaced variables and functions).

## 2.  **Taylor Approximation**: 

Letting the (k+1)th iteration be such that     $\mathbf{x}^{(k+1)} = \mathbf{x}^{(k)}+\Delta\mathbf{x}^{(k)}\approxeq\mathbf{z}$ 
so that
$$
\mathbf{0} = \mathbf{f}(\mathbf{x}^{(k+1)})
=\mathbf{f}(\mathbf{x}^{(k)} + \Delta \mathbf{x}^{(k)}) 
\approxeq \mathbf{f}(\mathbf{x}^{(k)}) + \mathbf{J}^{(k)}\Delta\mathbf{x}^{(k)}
$$

assuming the change $|\Delta \mathbf{x}^{(k)}|$ is sufficiently small, where

-   $\mathbf{x}^{(k)}$ is the kth Newton approximation,
-   $\mathbf{f}^{(k)} = \mathbf{f}(\mathbf{x}^{(k)})$ is the kth value of the n-dim. function **f**,
-   $\mathbf{J}^{(k)}=([f_{i,j}]_{n\times n})$ is the kth Jacobian function,
-   and $f_{i,j}$ is the jth partial derivative (with respect to $x_{j}$) of the ith component of **f**.

### 3.  **Conversion to Linear Algebra Problem**:
$$
\mathbf{J}^{(k)} \Delta \mathbf{x}^{(k)} = -\mathbf{f}^{(k)}
$$

can be converted to the Augmented Matrix:

$$
[\mathbf{A}|\mathbf{b}] = [\mathbf{J}^{(k)}|-\mathbf{f}^{(k)}]
$$

which can be solved by Forward Gaussian Elimination to get an
approximation for $\Delta \mathbf{x}^{(k)}$ which can be used to get the new
Newton n-dimensional iterate,

$$
\mathbf{x}^{(k+1)} =
\mathbf{x}^{(k)} + 
\Delta \mathbf{x}^{(k)}
$$

### 4.  **Numerical Example**:

\* *Intersection* of a circle of radius 2 and center (0,0) with a
exponential function function $y = 1 - e^{x}$. So let the component
functions be $f_{1}(x_{1},x_{2})$ and $f_{2}(x_{1},x_{2})$ or alternately
f(x,y) and g(x,y) without the subscripts.

\* *Vector Function with n=2*:
$$
f(x,y)=x^{2}+y^{2}-4
$$
$$
g(x,y) = e^{x} + y -1
$$
\* *2×2 Jacobian J*:
$$
\mathbf{J} =
\begin{bmatrix}
J_{11} & J_{12} \\
J_{21} & J_{22} \\
\end{bmatrix}
=
\begin{bmatrix}
2x & 2y \\
e^{x} & 1
\end{bmatrix}
$$
\* *Starting Guess (MATLAB Notation)*:

```matlab
[x0; y0] = [0; -2];
```

\* *0th Interate Interation: Initial Augmented Matrix using Forward
Gaussian Elimination and Virtual Full Pivoting (**pr** = row pivot
vector and **pc** = column pivot vector)*: The maximal full pivot is
found in the element (1,2) of $J^{(1)}$:

$$
\begin{bmatrix}
J & | & -\mathbf{f} & || & \mathbf{pr} & | &  \mathbf{pc}
\end{bmatrix}^{(0)}
=
\begin{bmatrix}
0 & -4 & 0 & 1 & 1 \\
1 & 1 & 2 & 2 & 2
\end{bmatrix}
\to
\begin{bmatrix}
0 & -4 & 0 & 1 & 2 \\
1 & (-0.25)_{m} & 2 & 2 & 1
\end{bmatrix}
$$

The multiplier (1/(-4))~m~ = (-0.25)~m~ is calculated and is not
really need at this step, except to do the elimination: J~22~ -&gt;
J~22~ - (-0.25)\*J~12~ = 0, since the two zeros in the second row
due not cause a change in J~21~ and "J~23~" = - g(0) = +2

Backsubstitution is trivial due to zeros in the pivot (1st) row,
yielding

for the first iterate answer.

\* *1st Iterate Elimination*: The first pivot is found in element
(2,1) of J(1) after substiting **x**(1) = $x(1); y(1)$
into the augmented matrix function $J(x,y) | -$f(x,y); g(x,y)$
$:

The elimination step used was J~1,j~ = J~1,j~ - (0.5413)\*J~2,j~ for
j=1, 3, where J~1,3~ is the element of the RHS (Right Hand Side) in
the first row.

Backsubstitution yields

for the second iterate answer.

\* *2nd Iterate Elimination*: The first pivot is found in element
(2,1), again, of J(2), after substituting **x**(2) = $x(2);
y(2)$ into the augmented matrix function:

The elimination step used was J~1,j~ = J~1,j~ - (0.6986)\*J~2,j~ for
j=1, 3, where J~1,3~ is the element of the RHS (Right Hand Side) in
the first row.

Backsubstitution yields

Two norm measures of the closeness of the iterates that might be
used for stopping criteria are the infinity (inf or maximal) norms:

For more terms, this procedure can be implemented in MATLAB.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Remarks:*

-   These calculation were done in 4 digit rounding exam precision as
indicated by the modified equal sign "=(4r)".
-   Also, this webpage was done in pure HTML, so the spacing and symbols
will not be as good as typeset graphics webapage or a text.
-   See also Heath's short and different Section 5.6.2 on N-Dimensional
Newton's Method. In addition, Gerald and Wheatley in the Section
2.12 on Systems of Nonlinear Equations treats the same example
somewhat differently.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Web Source: http://www.math.uic.edu/\~hanson/mcs471/newton-ndim.html**

**Email Comments or Questions to Professor Hanson**

[**Click Here For ClassHomePage**](http://www.math.uic.edu/~hanson/mcs471/)

------------------------------------------------------------------------
